Paint and coatings manufacturer Kansai Plascon has achieved a 100% improvement in operating costs over 36 months owing to its turnaround plan and sustainability agenda. “We lacked differentiation, had negative cash flow and strategic partnerships were becoming strained. We had high inventory levels and operating expenses, which were negatives, all exacerbated by ever-elevating interest payments. Our brand had the potential to erode among these strategic challenges,” said Kansai Plascon CEO Prejay Lalla. The transformation plan included changes in manufacturing, new sales and operating forecasting processes, outsourcing warehousing and logistics, the consolidation and resizing of production facilities and the re-engineering of the business to a fit-for-purpose structure. “The integration of environmental practices was central to this plan. We have adopted strict measures on all key environmental, social and governance issues, setting bold targets in order to reduce carbon emissions, electricity, water consumption and waste production," Lalla said. Additionally, to respond to the ever-growing movement of eco-active consumers, several new environment-friendly coatings were introduced. Further, the premium range paint containers are comprised of 70% up-cycled material, thereby reducing the amount of solid waste entering landfills or polluting the environment. Integral to the success of Lalla’s vision has been making the company accountable to its stakeholders and customers for every choice made, from products, through to energy and waste reduction and environmental efficiency of operations. “We are committed to implementing environmentally considerate practices in every aspect of our business. Corporate organisations have a big obligation to communities and our environment, and we cannot sell products that do not have social and environmental value for all people, changing society to ensure longevity for all," he said. “We have also introduced in-line dispersion equipment and robotics in our filling lines to increase production throughput. Our coating production has received significant upgrades in how we mix solid and liquid particles, minimising volatile organic compounds in water- and solvent-based coatings production,” Lalla said.