The Mayor of Johannesburg Mpho Phalatse has commented on the real causes behind some areas being better served in terms of pothole repairs and related service delivery in Johannesburg. “While there are historical challenges that exist beyond the immediate control of the Johannesburg Roads Agency (JRA), the service delivery model employed to try and address the backlog lends itself to regional disparities, leaving parts of Johannesburg with less than desirable levels of services delivery,” she notes. Following a meeting with the JRA on June 8, Phalatse released a statement in which she discusses the perceived reasons behind the massive backlog in the filling of potholes in various parts of the city. Data presented to the mayor reveals that, although an overall citywide reduction in the number of potholes by 23 298 was achieved in the last four months, the regional breakdown paints a concerning picture. “While 9 207 potholes were filled in Region D of the city, Regions B and E only had 1 010 and 1 705 repairs done, respectively, with the rest of the city falling somewhere in between,” Phalatse explains. She believes the City of Joburg (CoJ) can review its service delivery model and afford all residents of the city, across its seven regions, a smooth and safe travel experience. The mayor has shared her thoughts with JRA on immediate “low-hanging fruit” opportunities that can be leveraged, as well as urged Transport MMC Funzela Ngobeni to monitor the work and ensure the entity serves all residents equitably. Phalatse has assured that the JRA realises that this gap needs to be addressed immediately, while work on a longer-term strategy is under way. The mayor also confirms that her office will do daily monitoring to ensure this glaring gap in pothole repair between regions in Johannesburg is closed. As of July 1, when the CoJ’s 2022/23 budget kicks in, the JRA will have an allocation of R918-million for repairs and maintenance, and just over R1-billion for capital infrastructure projects.