Corporate social investment initiative the Attacq Foundation held its bursary session for students studying property-related and engineering courses at partner institutions on June 24. The students’ studies are facilitated and managed collectively by the South African Property Owners Association bursary fund, the South African Institute of Black Property Practitioners, the Atterbury trust, the Women’s Property Network Bursary Fund and the University of Pretoria. Two events themed “Recruitment and Support During Youth Month” were held in Johannesburg and Cape Town to bring together the bursary students studying in these cities so that they could network and engage with each other, as well as with leaders in the property industry. “Higher education in South Africa is sadly inaccessible for many young people and . . .  the Attacq Foundation, along with our partners, is empowering the next generation of property professionals,” Attacq social executive Janine Palmer said. The foundation, funded by JSE-listed real estate investment trust Attacq, is focused on sustainable education and training. It was founded in 2015 to support disadvantaged students pursuing real estate and construction-related courses by providing financial support through established programmes. Ensuring the youth is educated, equipped with necessary skills and well-prepared for employment is the primary focus area of the foundation. Since its inception, the foundation has initiated and supported a number of initiatives that address the challenges facing primary and secondary level education in South Africa, such as their ‘Keep Our Girls In School #Endperiodpoverty’ campaign and the ‘Rise Against Hunger’ school meal initiative. “Building our nation is about uplifting and giving back to the community in ways that create a sustainable difference. The link between education and empowerment cannot be overstated. I am excited to watch the journey of the bursary recipients we support as they grow into confident and competent industry players,” Palmer said.