SynapCAM has clinched the top spot in the Automechanika Johannesburg 2022 Innovation Awards. The product was designed and developed in the US and South Africa by Synap, and launched on the local market at the Automechanika automotive aftermarket and related industries show held in Johannesburg in June. The competition was open to any recently introduced automotive product, and the range of entries included electronic automotive products, driver aids, repair and maintenance equipment and online services. Six products out of more than a dozen entries were chosen as finalists by a panel of judges from the automotive industry. SynapCAM came out on top after scoring the highest points average on aspects such as design, quality, efficiency, functionality, practicality, value for money, environment-friendliness and innovation. The product uses vision-based artificial intelligence (AI) to bring to market “user-friendly, fast, and reliable driver assistance”, promises Synap. It analyses data from a dedicated infra-red driver camera, as well as dual advanced driver assistance system vehicle cameras in real time, and without the need for a cloud-based server. This data – along with a proprietary behaviour algorithm – can identify what the driver is doing, while vision-based AI object detection can identify objects such as cell phones, seat belts, cigarettes, food and drink. The ability to intervene and correct driver behaviour in real time, through custom messages and buzzers, prevents drivers from falling asleep, becoming distracted or driving erratically. The judges said the product held great potential in the promotion of road safety and should be well received in the trucking and logistics industries. It could also be a beneficial tool in new driver training. “By using AI vision technology and a proprietary algorithm to detect dangerous or distracted driver behaviour, SynapCAM provides instant feedback that could potentially save lives,” says Synap CEO Donovan Devine. “In addition, it provides coaching that will make drivers more aware, alert and efficient. Essentially, any vehicle can now become a smart vehicle with SynapCAM.” The silver certificate in the Automechanika Johannesburg 2022 Innovation Awards went to Macrocomm’s Smart Trailer Plug, which also made its public debut at the trade fair. The plug is designed to eliminate the inconvenience of getting in and out of a vehicle to check the status of the trailer or caravan lights. When plugged in, the unit automatically does a fault check on all lights, with feedback given via a cell phone app. If a malfunction is detected, a warning is sent to indicate which light is faulty. In the case of a short, the unit will automatically isolate the trailer from the tow vehicle’s electronics. This means that no fuses will be blown on the tow vehicle’s fuse box. No special harnesses are needed, and the software is upgradeable to add features such as tyre pressure sensing and Bluetooth. The judges scored it highly in terms of functionality, practicality and user benefits, noting that it would be of particular benefit in situations where regular checks are required to ensure trailer safety. The bronze medal in the 2022 awards went to the Rotrix TSH-016 and TSH-50016, entered by Kalundu Trading. Manufactured in Ukraine and introduced locally at the end of 2021, the Rotrix TSH-016 is a handheld tester for voltage regulators and alternators, while the TSH-50016 is an add-on cable which enables the testing of starter motors.