University of Cape Town (UCT) CFO Vincent Motholo has been reappointed as chairperson of the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (Saica). Motholo, who is a qualified chartered accountant, will chair the board of the institute that is at the forefront of developing, influencing and leading the highest standards of ethics, education and professional excellence in the delivery of quality accountancy skills. Saica is responsible for safeguarding professional standards; advancing and maintaining the relevance of the profession; and regulating the members’ and associates’ professional conduct, UCT said. Motholo joined UCT on October 1, 2021. “It is an honour to, once again, be entrusted with the enormous responsibility of leading Saica. I look forward to continue sharing my expertise, accumulated over the past years through my involvement with Saica’s various structures and, of course, to continuing gaining more expertise through this role,” he said. “I hope that, together with the board and all the relevant stakeholders, we will continue taking Saica to greater heights and making a meaningful impact on the accountancy profession.” Championing an innovation-friendly culture, with a parallel focus on developing talent and promoting professional growth, Motholo actively participates in the education of aspiring chartered accountants. He has been involved as one of the subject matter experts on the monitoring review panel responsible for assessing the accreditation of universities. Motholo has also served on Saica’s Audit and Risk Committee as an independent non-board member. His other previous committee membership in the sector includes the Banking Sector Training Authority’s Independent Finance and Remuneration Committee, the South African State Theatre’s Audit and Risk Committee and the Independent Police and Investigative Directorate’s Risk Committee, where he was chairperson. Motholo holds a BComm in Accounting Sciences from the University of Pretoria as well as a BComm Honours in Accounting and a Certificate in the Theory of Accounting from the University of KwaZulu-Natal. He completed the Business and Management Development programme at the University of Pretoria’s Gordon Institute of Business Science. His reappointment as Saica chairperson is illustrative of the calibre of leadership and the immense expertise within the UCT executive, the university said.