Industry organisation the South African Photovoltaic Industry Association (SAPVIA) has elected Dr Rethabile Melamu as its new CEO and Chanda Nxumalo as its new chairperson during the organisation's tenth annual general meeting held on June 9. Melamu is a chemical and environmental engineer by training and has become renowned for her international expertise in the green economy and energy sectors. She has leveraged both the theoretical and practical to harness innovative smart technologies to mitigate the impact of climate change in society, with a dedicated focus on African sustainable development, SAPVIA said. “The new board has a wealth of knowledge and expertise and we are grateful for their willingness to commit their time, energy and expertise to building SAPVIA and the photovoltaic industry,” Melamu said. “I look forward to working with them as well as stakeholders across the energy sector and in government to deliver value to our members, the public sector and South African citizens,” she said. Nxumalo has a record of 13 years delivering in the renewable energy and power sector. She has extensive experience working in technical, business development and executive capacities in African, American and European markets. Nxumalo holds a Masters in Engineering, Economics and Management from the University of Oxford. She has also served as spokesperson and vice-chairperson for SAPVIA and is currently a director at advisory services and asset management for sub-Saharan Africa renewable energy projects company Harmattan Renewables. “I am delighted to take on the role of chairperson at SAPVIA and it will be my pleasure to serve alongside our new CEO and our management committee. The association is only as strong as our members, and together we have achieved much, but we must work harder to ensure that this new decade of solar realises its full potential,” said Nxumalo. “Solar PV continues to demonstrate that it is the least-cost, quickest-to-build option for power generation and we must work to ensure that it contributes even more to the economic upliftment and empowerment of individuals and communities. “I am confident that our membership base has the experience, expertise and dynamism to deliver another decade of solar that maximises the opportunity for our members and South Africa,” she said. The new management and executive team will work to advocate, engage and influence on behalf of members to harness the power of solar and capitalise on the opportunities it offers for individuals and all of South Africa. “The SAPVIA mission is to vigorously mobilise support for the sustainable growth of solar PV in South Africa and the rest of sub-Saharan Africa,” the organisation said. SAPVIA is a member-led organisation with the express purpose of growing the solar PV sector’s role in powering South Africa’s future. It advocates, engages and influences on behalf of members to harness the power of solar PV and capitalise on the opportunities it offers companies, individuals and the broader South African economy.