Retail company Massmart officially opened its new distribution centre in Riversands, Johannesburg, on June 14. The 75 000 m2 warehouse is the second of three new facilities in Massmart’s new centralised network, which uses shared distribution centres to serve stores across the entire group. The new facility was custom designed to suit Massmart’s needs and will manage the highest volume throughput of all Massmart facilities. In line with Massmart’s supply chain strategy, the Riversands distribution centre is a product-based distribution centre, specialising in high-volume, pallet-based products. “Over 30% of Massmart stores are based in Gauteng, so this facility will give us the opportunity to deliver fast-moving products to these stores at greater speed, thanks to the use of full pallets, with no need for repacking inside the facility,” Massmart COO Jonathan Molapo said. Construction of the facility began in late 2019, following thorough planning and engagement with parent company Walmart regarding optimal designs. One thing the project team said it could not have foreseen was the need to fast-track the completion of the facility to keep stores stocked following the civil unrest and riots that plagued parts of the country in July last year. “I must acknowledge the way our partners on the project – R&L Architects and EDS Engineers and our landlord Century Properties – have supported us throughout, and particularly when the timeline was brought forward by five months,” Molapo said. The Riversands campus makes use of natural light, as well as energy-saving light emitting diode lights with motion sensors attached. The campus also uses borehole water for its wash bays and reserve water tanks. In addition to this, throughout the construction process, the wetlands next to the distribution centre have been preserved to support healthy ecosystem functioning and provide a refuge for resident flora and fauna. “Every element of this distribution centre is geared towards improving efficiency. From reducing our own energy usage to the operational efficiency of the high-volume product focus, Riversands will play an important role in getting the right products onto our shelves at the best possible price for customers,” Molapo said.