The Johannesburg Development Agency (JDA) has started construction of the Bertrams Multipurpose Centre, on the eastern edge of the inner city central business district (CBD). The Bertrams Multipurpose Centre will house a community hall, a women’s empowerment centre, childcare facilities, senior citizens support facilities, social development offices, youth and skills development facilities and a basketball court. The suburb of Bertrams is one of the oldest in Johannesburg and the skills centre has served the community for many years by providing sewing, cooking, baking and early childhood development courses, among other offerings, says City of Johannesburg Health and Social Development MMC Ashley Sauls. The construction works for the Bertrams Multipurpose Centre comprises the demolition of existing structures and the construction of a new multi-storey multipurpose centre. Once completed, the Betrams Multipurpose Centre will support local economic development, encourage further investment and upgrading in the area and promote improved social cohesion. It will be handed over to the Social Development Department once complete, he says. Further, the facility’s green, or environment-friendly, elements mean the multipurpose centre is energy efficient and sustainable, with a low carbon footprint and causing a minimal impact on the environment. A street-facing agricultural garden has greenhouses with training rooms, and hydroponic and aquaponic facilities will form part of the construction works. The garden will extend to the roof through balconies and vertical interior spaces. Extensive glazing will allow daylight throughout the building, says Sauls. The construction of the Bertrams Multipurpose Centre aligns with the JDA’s vision to build a more welcoming, competitive and resilient Johannesburg that is a better city to live, work and play in. The project also aligns with the Joburg 2040 Growth and Development Strategy outcome of efficiently and effectively delivering sustainable social and economic infrastructure projects. The aim is to develop resilient, liveable, sustainable urban environments, underpinned by infrastructure supportive of a low-carbon economy, says Sauls. The Bertrams Multipurpose Centre is adjacent to the Greater Ellis Park. The sports precinct is part of the revitalisation project by the JDA to transform the area into an eye-catching, accessible hub linking sport, education, residential and transport sectors. It is strategically and conveniently located adjacent to public transport like the Rea Vaya bus rapid transit service, buses and taxi routes, providing access to the facility from the CBD and eastern suburbs of Jeppestown, New Doornfontein, Troyeville and Kensington. "The multipurpose centre upgrade will provide opportunities for social interaction, empowering and motivating youth, the elderly, and sports lovers to participate in sports and improve their lifestyle to stay healthy. The policy of the City of Joburg is to reach the 30% local spend and provide access to employment opportunities to local contractors to participate in the delivery of the associated scope of works," says Sauls.