From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: As South African engineered vibratory equipment manufacturer Kwatani emerges stronger, having overcome the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, the technology-driven company is reviewing options of expanding to meet anticipated growth. Natasha Odendaal has the story. Natasha Odendaal: The company has evolved to become more innovative and flexible than before, following the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic. Kwatani CEO Kim Schoepflin: Kwatani GM operations Riaan Steinmann: Natasha Odendaal: Kwatani has recorded significant growth over the past few years and has positioned itself well to meet the upswing seen across the industries worldwide, including in Africa, where its equipment is used. Kwatani CEO Kim Schoepflin: Natasha Odendaal: As the original equipment manufacturer continues to experience strong growth, it continuously reviews and optimises its internal processes, as well as expands and enhances capacity and resources at its extensive 17 000 m2 local manufacturing facility in Kempton Park. Kwatani CEO Kim Schoepflin: Natasha Odendaal: Further, having access to the Sandvik technology and pool of resources will accelerate Kwatani’s customised vibrating equipment development further. Multinational Sandvik Group acquired Kwatani in December, with customers set to benefit from the combined resources of Sandvik and Kwatani. Kwatani CEO Kim Schoepflin: Natasha Odendaal: Kwatani has an above average percentage of highly skilled and qualified staff, including boilermakers, artisans, certified welders and engineers, besides others, with vast experience and a low turnover rate, and consequently good retention of skills. The group invests significantly into engineering, operations and its workforce, upskilling and employing the best skills for the job, and continuously improving on safety measures, which resulted in an impeccable safety record, completing a full year without any lost-time injury. Kwatani GM operations Riaan Steinmann: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.