Trade, Industry and Competition Minister Ebrahim Patel has announced the appointment of Doris Tshepe as the new Competition Commission Commissioner. Cabinet was briefed on the decision on June 8 and gave its support for the appointment. Tshepe will begin her duties as Commissioner by September. “Ms Doris Tshepe has wide experience on matters relating to the mandate of the Competition Commission and has been active in the competition field for many years. She brings deep insights from her work in advising government on reforms to competition law and as a practitioner representing clients on competition cases,” Patel said on June 9. Tshepe holds a B Proc degree, an LLB degree and an LLM degree in Tax Law. She has been a practicing attorney for more than 20 years, specialising in constitutional and administrative law, legislative drafting, media and communication law, commercial law, competition law and employment law with a range of public and private sector clients. She served on an Advisory Panel on the major amendments to the Competition Act, which was signed into law by President Cyril Ramaphosa in 2019. She has further served as the attorney in a number of significant competition cases. She served as MD at law firm Cheadle Thompson and Haysom until June 30, 2018 and is a member of the Judicial Services Commission (JSC). Patel thanked outgoing Commissioner Tembinkosi Bonakele for his contribution to the work of the commission, stretching over 18 years, of which nine years were as Commissioner. “Commissioner Bonakele has played an important role in developing the Competition Commission as an internationally-recognised economic regulator. His work to strengthen the commission’s capacity in cartel and merger investigations has resulted in more competitive markets, substantial numbers of jobs retained, development programmes for small and medium-sized business, and greater levels of investment. “He has ably led efforts to establish South Africa as a leader in competition policy and enforcement internationally, particularly on the African continent,” Patel said. Bonakele will continue in his position until Tshepe takes office. The Ministry is in discussion with him on an appropriate set of responsibilities which would see him use his skills and experience in the competition and public policy area after completion of his period as Commissioner.