Barlow Park is set to become Sandton’s new residential neighbourhood and will offer affordable housing. Bulk earthworks for the first phase of the R3-billion project started in June, and will turn the property, which previously housed Barloworld’s corporate office, logistics and equipment head offices into a modern residential-anchored mixed-use neighbourhood. Property investor and developer Atterbury, which is leading the development in conjunction with Barloworld, was awarded the development in 2017 based on its vision of developing a mixed-use precinct on the site. Originally envisioned as an office-focused project due to start in April 2020, the Covid-19 lockdown paused its development. The pandemic highlighted and accelerated structural changes in the way people live and work. By introducing Divercity as co-developer, and owing to its success with the recently launched Jewel City precinct, Atterbury and Divercity have now re-shaped the development into a residential-anchored modern multiuse neighbourhood. Situated at a key connection point between Sandton and Alexandra, the Barlow Park development is considered to be ideally positioned to provide a positive impact on its immediate community. It is posited to create local economic and job opportunities during construction and after its completion, while meeting some of the significant need for quality, connected residential accommodation in the area. Through its association with Divercity, Atterbury says it became aware of the constant demand for quality affordable housing in prime locations in Johannesburg that are well connected to amenities, which inspired its new vision for Barlow Park. With this in mind, Atterbury introduced Divercity as a partner in the Barlow Park development. Divercity specialises in residential-focused mixed-use developments and will play a crucial role as joint development manager with Atterbury. Commercial property development players Moolman Group and Twin City Development are also co-investing in the development. The new Barlow Park development will include 4 100 affordable residential units in 11 apartment blocks, which will be served by free-for-resident amenities such as a recreation centre, clubhouse, pool, business centre, coffee shop, gym and sports facilities, set within an urban forest. Several of Barlow Park’s new buildings have been designed around the trees growing on the site. All indigenous trees in the precinct will be preserved during the construction process. Barlow Park’s public space will include 5 500 m2 of retail in an open-air street-level neighbourhood convenience centre anchored by Checkers and Clicks and featuring a mix of eateries, fast foods, banking and more. Located at the corner of Katherine street, it is also noted as ideal for commuters to access. The development plan allows for a primary school, high school and pre-school, a medical centre, as well as shared office space with a Curro DigiEd high school secured in the first phase opening. Starting to the west end of the site, the first phase of the development will include the convenience retail, the high school and the 750 residential units that make up the first two apartment blocks. Barlow Park will be developed out towards the east of the precinct, with the second phase of 860 units in the next two residential blocks planned to start a year later. The roll-out of the Barlow Park development will respond to demand, with the entire project expected to take six to eight years to develop. Atterbury, with its commercial property asset management expertise, and Divercity, with its rental housing asset management skill, will perform the asset management functions for the completed development. Barlow Park is situated at 180 Katherine street in the financial capital of Sandton. The property enjoys a prime position flanked by the M1 highway and the major Katherine street thoroughfare.