To accelerate the uptake of energy performance certificates (EPCs) in South Africa, the Green Building Council South Africa (GBCSA) and the Carbon Trust are calling for 250 building owners and five small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMMEs) to participate in an EPC project funded by UK Partnering for Accelerated Climate Transitions (PACT). Since inception of the UK PACT-funded project in March 2021, the GBCSA and Carbon Trust have supported the South African National Energy Development Institute (SANEDI), and the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE) with the implementation of a mechanism to support South Africa’s new EPC regulation that aims to drive energy disclosure within South Africa’s existing building stock. South Africa’s EPC regulation requires certain types of public sector buildings greater than 1 000 m² and private sector buildings greater than 2 000 m² to obtain an EPC by the end of this year. As the December deadline for obtaining an EPC approaches for affected building owners, the project is shifting focus from helping to lay the EPC groundwork, to supporting the implementation of the mechanism. This is anticipated to accelerate the uptake of EPCs in South Africa. The project team is now actively seeking to support building owners with EPC groundwork and SMMEs who would like to become South African National Accreditation System- (SANAS-) accredited inspection bodies. Support will be offered to 250 building owners or managers in obtaining EPCs, with the criteria entailing that the building is older than two years with no recent major refurbishments; the buildings being of a specific occupancy class; and that a minimum of 12 months of energy data is available for the building. Owners or building/facilities managers of the selected buildings will be provided with introductory EPC training; an EPC tool to facilitate data gathering and to assist with the necessary calculations; and access to an email-based ‘help desk’ to provide ongoing support. Five SMMEs will be offered financial and technical support to help them obtain accreditation from SANAS as an inspection body able to issue EPCs. Interested parties can apply online.