Ford South Africa (SA) has launched a Ranger Online Service Price Calculator, designed to generate a quote for the next scheduled service before the customer takes their vehicle to the dealership. The calculator also allows customers to compare quotes between Ford dealers. The local arm of the US car maker believes the initiative offers customers price transparency on vehicle servicing costs and plays an important role in modernising the customer experience, while also building trust between Ford and its customers. “We are committed to modernising our systems within the ambit of the service sector, especially when it leads to simplified solutions and more direct customer care,” says Ford SA customer service division retail manager Harm Kruyshaar. “We are confident that by giving our customers more control and transparency they will continue to service their vehicles at Ford dealerships.” The Online Service Price Calculator, which is currently available only for derivatives of the Ford Ranger – but which will soon roll out to other Ford models ­– gives customers the option of using Ford genuine parts or, where available, more cost-effective Motorcraft parts, which are alternative Ford approved parts that are engineered to original equipment specification. Once the online quote has been generated, and a booking has been made, the vehicle can be taken to the relevant dealer to be serviced at the quoted price. Customers are given the option to compare quotes at more than 100 authorised Ford dealers around the country. Customers who did not opt for the Ford Protect Service Plan when purchasing their vehicles can still use the Online Service Price Calculator, and then take their Rangers to a Ford dealership. Another customer convenience initiative currently being rolled out across the Ford dealer network is the Express Service offering. It allows customers to book a specific service timeslot and have their vehicles serviced within 60 minutes by two trained technicians working on the vehicle in sequence. Express Service is currently offered at select Ford dealerships and has to be requested when making the booking with the service adviser.