South African private sector airline group Comair has announced that, as a pre-emptive precaution, it has transferred the line maintenance of its fleet to South African Airways Technical (SAAT) from the South African operation of Lufthansa Technik. This was because the South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) had made a number of findings regarding Lufthansa Technik, following its recent review of its maintenance facility at OR Tambo International Airport, east of Johannesburg. While Lufthansa Technik passed its routine SACAA audit last month, an unscheduled SACAA review in recent days found a number of issues (known as “findings”) at the facility. These have to be addressed within 24 hours or its Approved Maintenance Organisation licence would be suspended (which would be on Wednesday). “Our priority at the moment is to restore a full, reliable flight schedule for our customers to ensure they can book and fly with confidence, which is why, in these extraordinary circumstances, we acted as soon as we were informed that the suspension was a possibility,” explained Comair CEO Glenn Orsmond. Currently, the company used both Lufthansa Technik and SAAT to maintain its aircraft. Comair operates both the British Airways in South Africa and the Kulula low-cost carrier brands. The SACAA grounded Comair for four days last week, as a precaution, following findings made during a review of the company. These findings were directed at the level of the supporting evidence for some quality assurance process management systems and procedures, as well as the structure of the safety department and its personnel, and the flow of repair confirmation documentation. The grounding was lifted after these issues were successfully addressed. The SACAA made no findings regarding the safety and security of either flight operations or maintenance by Comair. “While Comair respects and fully supports the SACAA in fulfilling its mandate and in so doing, ensuring that flight safety standards prevail in South Africa, Lufthansa and its technical maintenance facility ranks globally as one of the world’s most respected airlines and maintenance organisations,” pointed out Comair in its statement. “Lufthansa Technik is certified by more than 40 of the world’s foremost airworthiness authorities, has over 800 customers, 22 000 employees and more than 4 500 exclusive contracts globally.”