Business organisation Business Leadership South Africa (BLSA) CEO Busi Mavuso on March 14 said the BLSA was, to a large extent, the outcome of the late Michael Spicer’s efforts to create a future-proof business organisation that is ready to contribute to the development of South Africa. It was under his guidance that the South African Foundation, an organisation more focused on protecting business during Apartheid, was transformed into BLSA in 2005. "Michael led our organisation for the next six years, building it into an effective voice for business that could research and engage with government and other social partners. His death last week came as a shock to all of us, but he has left a proud legacy at BLSA," Mavuso said. Spicer was a historian, businessperson and passionate believer that South Africa benefits when business and government work well together. He was often in the middle of forging that relationship, Mavuso said. "When appointed out of academia to look after public affairs at Anglo American by then chairperson Gavin Relly, one of his first tasks was to attend PW Botha’s infamous Rubicon speech in 1985 that dashed the hopes that the Botha government would reform. "Five years later, he became deputy chairperson of the Consultative Business Form, a group of business leaders formed to engage with the Congress of South African Trade Unions and the United Democratic Front and, ultimately, the new leadership through Codesa. "He was known for his incisive analysis of the trade-offs required between opposed counterparts and was not afraid to speak truth to power, often leaving many of his political counterparts quite uncomfortable. But he knew when discomfort was entirely appropriate and would stand firm." Spicer later played pivotal roles in South African Tourism and Brand South Africa, marketing the country to the world. "He was a keen advocate of the potential that business has to generate employment and ultimately eliminate poverty and he persisted throughout his career in engaging government to make the case for a positive environment in which business could thrive," Mavuso said. Despite officially retiring in 2015 when he stepped down as chairperson of Anglo American South Africa, Spicer remained a tireless advocate for the country. "He was a prolific communicator to the end. I appreciated getting messages of support and comments from him in response to various public stances BLSA took. I know many others across our society similarly benefited from Michael’s regular emails and messages of encouragement and support. "Many business leaders have commented over the past few days on the profound contribution that Michael made to this country. His legacy is clear in BLSA as well as many other organisations. My condolences to his wife Irene and sons Nicholas and Simon," she said.