Investment by the City of Johannesburg (CoJ) in rail infrastructure would create 76 000 jobs, while prioritising environment-friendly construction in city projects would create 143 000 green jobs by 2030, CoJ Environment and Infrastructure Services MMC Michael Sun has said, citing the results of research conducted by cities climate change network C40 Cities. The city's multi-party government has committed to spurring a just economic transition within the city’s economy and to ensure all residents at risk of losing a job in non-green industries are given opportunities to work in other sectors essential to a sustainable economy and society. “Green jobs are extremely important for the City of Johannesburg. They not only provide a lasting solution to the issues of poverty and inequality in our city, but also enable our residents to take advantage of opportunities that are secure, with equitable pay and offer a dignified environment to workers,” Sun said. The CoJ has already taken the first step in creating environmentally sustainable employment by adopting its Climate Action Plan, which is currently being adopted in all of the city’s processes and plans. “Steadfast plans are in place to invest in green sectors that will not only deliver reliable services to communities but also assist in the creation of quality employment for Johannesburg’s residents,” Sun added. BUILDING EFFICIENCY
Cities can only grow and improve services to citizens if there are continuous building activities. The construction sector and the built environment are critical for achieving this growth in an environmentally sustainable and resource-efficient way, he says. “From the research, we know that a shift to green buildings can potentially lead to creating 100 000 jobs in the city alone,” he said on March 29 during a C40 Cities media briefing. The CoJ has a green building policy in place that aims to have all new buildings have net-zero carbon emissions by 2030 and for all existing buildings to be net-zero carbon emitters by 2050. These buildings will require high energy efficiency equipment and systems, with some potentially being self-sufficient and powered by on-site or off-site renewable energy sources. “The green building sector and energy efficiency not only helps to shield the city from load-shedding, but investment in such green jobs gives a boost to supply chains that can further drive the green economy. “The City of Johannesburg is also formulating policies that will aid green building and support green jobs to ensure that us, as local government, become the champions of the green economy and ensure our residents are alongside us on this journey that will provide jobs that are green and sustainable for our residents,” said Sun. South African cities have a huge and critical role to play in delivering green jobs and enabling local just transitions. “We believe national government must recognise our leadership and offer cities such as Johannesburg direct sources of investment to go even further to realise the full potential of employment growth in the growing green sector of our local economy,” he said.