Hyundai Automotive South Africa (HASA) aims to sell 40 000 units this year, “if we get the supply we want”, says HASA sales and operations director Stanley Anderson. This will be 6 000 units more than the 34 000 units the Korean brand sold in the domestic market last year. Anderson does not foresee the war in the Ukraine limiting supply to the South African importer as its source-plants fall outside the ambit of the conflict. Hyundai has closed its plant in Russia, which should redirect the semi-conductors used there to its Indian plants, which should, in turn, improve supply to HASA, as 70% of its models are sourced from India, notes Anderson. Hyundai has faced tough competition from Suzuki this year, with the local arm of the Japanese importer edging into third place in the domestic market. “Obviously their supply is slightly better than ours,” says Anderson. “But we are still number three when it comes to retail sales. “If we had three thousand cars now on rubber that we could spare, we could sell them to the rental companies tomorrow. They are desperate for stock. We are getting sufficient stock for retail, but the problem is to get additional stock for the rental companies.” The new Tucson will be an important part of HASA’s strategy to achieve 18% growth this year, as 15 346 units of the previous, third-generation sports-utility vehicle (SUV) were sold locally. “We have had significant success with the Tucson in South Africa – it soon became the mainstay of our range after its local introduction in 2004,” says Anderson. The Tucson is the first Hyundai SUV to be developed according to the company’s new ‘Sensuous Sportiness’ design, with the vehicle announcing a strong departure from the previous Tucson’s look and feel. The new model is 150 mm longer, 15 mm wider, and the wheelbase is 85 mm longer than the previous generation. Boot space has also been increased, offering 539 l of luggage capacity with the seats up, and up to 1 860 l with the seats folded. The rear seat-backs can be folded forward in a 60:40 ratio. The outer seats on the rear bench also have Isofix latching points for the fitment of child protection seats. The new Tucson has an audiovisual navigation (AVN) touch screen, which dispenses with physical knobs and buttons, so all AVN, heat, ventilation and air conditioning functions are controlled via touch, making it the first Hyundai model to feature a full touchscreen console. The Premium derivative features a cloth seat covering, while the Executive and Elite variants have artificial leather seats. The Elite variants are also equipped with a panoramic glass sun roof. The new Tucson offers a range of comfort features, including three-zone automatic climate control and heated front seats, and ventilated front seats for the Executive and Elite derivatives. Apple CarPlay and Android Auto cell phone connectivity are standard features across the range. Other infotainment and connectivity features include a wireless charging pad in the centre console, and front and rear USB ports. The new Tucson is fitted with a six-airbag system. Active safety and driving assistance in the Tucson range (not available on all models) includes blind-spot collision warning, as well as rear cross-traffic alert, which reduces the risk of colliding with approaching traffic when reversing out of narrow areas with low visibility. The range makes use of two four-cylinder engines – a naturally aspirated 2-l petrol and a 2-l turbodiesel powertrain. The Smartstream G 2.0 MPI petrol engine, linked to six-speed automatic transmission, does duty in the Premium, Executive and one of the Elite variants, while the Smartstream D 2.0 turbocharged diesel engine, coupled with an eight-speed transmission, is used in the other Elite derivative. The 2-l petrol engine delivers 115 kW peak power at 6 200 rpm, and 192 Nm peak torque at 4 500 rpm. The turbodiesel offers 137 kW peak power at 4 000 rpm, and 416 Nm maximum torque at between 2 000 rpm and 2 750 rpm. Fuel consumption in a combined test cycle was measured at 8.9 l/100 km for the 2-l petrol variants, while the turbodiesel Elite uses 7.9 l/100 km. Pricing for the new Tucson starts at R519 900. All models are sold with a seven-year/200 000 km manufacturer’s warranty, a six-year/90 000 km service plan and roadside assistance for seven years or 150 000 km.