Isuzu Motors South Africa (IMSA) will be implementing a dual-product strategy by retaining production of a number of key models from the current Isuzu D-Max line-up. This is a similar strategy to Volkswagen Polo Vivo production and Nissan NP 300 assembly where the previous model is retained as a lower-cost option to the newcomer model. The news comes as Isuzu celebrates the introduction of the new, seventh-generation D-Max bakkie for South African and other export markets across the continent. Going forward, both bakkie ranges will be produced at Isuzu’s assembly plant in Gqeberha, where the local arm of the Japanese company now manufacturers the sixth-generation D-Max, the incoming seventh-generation D-Max, and Isuzu trucks. “Our strategy is to support Isuzu’s objectives by retaining Gen 6 models which have performed very well in the workhorse segment of the market,” says IMSA technical operations senior VP Dominic Rimmer. “In addition to boosting our fleet business, we intend to increase light commercial vehicle exports into key left- and right-hand-drive markets within the rest of Africa. The sixth-generation D-Max ,which is now known as Gen 6, will be offered “with five competitively priced models” in South Africa, four models in right-hand-drive export markets, and three models in left-hand-drive export markets. IMSA believes buyers of Gen 6 models will benefit from ten years of improvement that Isuzu engineers have put into the development of the vehicle during its lifecycle. “The D-Max is engineered for the best performance in our unique local conditions, and these Gen 6 models remain a valuable proposition for fleet operators who place great importance on running costs and minimum downtime,” says Rimmer. Gen 6 continues with two of Isuzu’s current diesel engines, namely the 2.5-l Leed and 2.5-l high-output engines. All Isuzu D-Max bakkies come standard with Isuzu Complete Care, comprising a five-year/120 000 km bumper-to-bumper warranty and Isuzu Roadside Assistance. A five-year/unlimited kilometre anticorrosion warranty and a five-year/90 000 km service plan are also included. Service intervals are every 15 000 km/12 months. Pricing for the Gen 6 range starts at R328 400.