Brazil-based major aerospace group Embraer has announced that it is entering the jet air freighter market, by offering passenger-to-freighter (P2F) conversions of its E190 and E195 airliners, designated as the E190F and E195F respectively. The E190 and E195 are the two largest models in the company’s E-Jet family, which it is beginning to replace in production with its next generation E-Jet E2 family. “Perfectly positioned to fill the gap in the freighter market between turboprops and larger narrowbody jets, our P2F E-Jet conversion hits the market as the demand for airfreight continues to take off, and as e-commerce and trade, in general, undergoes a global structural transformation,” asserted Embraer Commercial Aviation president and CEO Arjan Meijer. The conversion will be available to all pre-owned E190s and E195s, and the first P2F conversion is expected to enter service in 2024. Embraer regards these freighter conversions as ‘right-sized’ for many fast delivery and e-commerce missions, and as being “perfect” for same-day delivery and decentralised operations in particular.  Existing small narrowbody freighter aircraft tend to be elderly, highly polluting and inefficient, and now very close to retirement. Meanwhile, earlier examples of the E190 and E195 airliners have been in service for ten to 15 years and the long-term leases covering them are coming to an end, noted the airframer. They will be replaced in the passenger-carrying role over the next decade. Converting them to dedicated freighters would extend the lives of the oldest E190s and E195s by a further ten to 15 years. Moreover, the E190F and E195F will have more than 50% greater cargo volume and 200% greater range than standard large turboprop freighter aircraft. They will also have up to 30% lower operating costs than narrowbody jet freighters. “The E-Jet air freighters will provide fast, reliable, and cost-effective service to freight forwarders, extend the revenue earning life of E-Jets, support E-Jets’ asset values and create a strong business case encouraging the replacement of earlier aircraft with modern, more efficient, passenger aircraft,” affirmed Embraer Services and Support president and CEO Johann Bordais. “With more than 1 600 E-Jets delivered globally, customers of this new freighter segment will benefit from a well established, mature, global services network, in addition to a comprehensive portfolio of products ready to support their operation from day one.” The conversions will be carried out by Embraer in its Brazilian facilities. The changes will include the fitting of main deck front cargo door, the reinforcement of the floor, and the installation of a cargo handling system and of a cargo smoke detection system (with appropriate fire extinguishers). Further, a rigid cargo barrier (RCB) will be fitted, including an access door. The RCB will be able to withstand forces equivalent to up to and including nine times the force of Earth’s gravity at sea level. There will also be changes in the pressurisation and cooling systems and provision will be made for the handling of hazardous cargoes. The E190F will be able to carry a maximum payload of 10 700 kg, and the E195F will be able to take 12 300 kg. Embraer foresees, over the next 20 years, a market for some 700 freighter aircraft in this category.