Formula E has revealed the track route for the inaugural Cape Town E-Prix. The proposed race track has been designed for the electric cars to race around the Green Point Park and Cape Town Stadium area during the local leg of the 2022/23 ABB FIA Formula E World Championship. “This exciting international event will put Cape Town firmly on the global racing circuit, showcasing the city to audiences around the world,” says Cape Town Mayor Geordin Hill-Lewis. “This will help bring more people to Cape Town, driving economic recovery and growth. It will also attract a new market of racing enthusiasts to visit Cape Town.” “Our city has a strong local racing community, and I know they’ll be thrilled with this event. There are so many benefits to bringing Formula E to our city,” says Hill-Lewis. “Cape Town has already shown its skill in hosting major international motor sporting events such as the FIA Rallycross Championship, the Extreme Festival National Championship at Killarney, as well as the annual Drift City at the iconic Grand Parade,” notes Safety and Security MMC JP Smith. “We’ve had a very positive response within our ecosystem of teams, drivers and sponsors about coming to Cape Town, so we are delighted that the City is joining our Season 9 calendar,” says Formula E co-founder and chief championship officer Alberto Longo. “When I first met Iain Banner, chairman of race promoter e-Movement, in 2019, he said that he was confident that Cape Town had the potential to be one of the top cities on our global calendar.” Planning Requirements
In early 2018, the E-Movement consortium approached the City of Cape Town for its support in bringing Formula E to the Western Cape capital. Following lengthy discussions, a decision was made to undertake a feasibility study to determine whether it would be viable to host the event in Cape Town. Following the completion of this study, the city council approved R44-million in funding for road upgrades in the Green Point Precinct, where the Formula E event is set to take place. The civil engineering works required to realise the track layout are being funded through the City’s Urban Mobility Directorate.