UK-based global major aerospace and defence group BAE Systems has reported that it successfully executed a flight test of ‘Manned Unmanned Teaming’ (MUM-T) technology, in partnership with the US Strategic Capabilities Office (which falls under the Office of the US Deputy Secretary of Defence). The technology-demonstrating flight test took place at an undisclosed US Defence Department flight test range. MUM-T would allow crewed and uncrewed aircraft (UAVs) to work together as a single team to execute combat missions. The test involved a crewed aircraft and multiple UAVs, employing real mission systems, to carry out a real-world simulation of a combat mission, conducted in an operationally representative environment. MUM-T technology has been developed at the group’s facility in Endicott in the US State of New York. The pilot of the crewed aircraft used a BAE Systems Human Machine Interface (HMI) to monitor the progress of the mission and to interact with the UAVs when required. The UAVs themselves interacted with each other to autonomously develop and implement the tactics necessary to execute the mission. “The development of autonomous technology is crucial to protect our warfighters against emerging threats,” stated BAE Systems Controls and Avionics Solutions VP and GM Ehtisham Siddiqui. “This flight test demonstrates our team’s commitment to accelerate the deployment of reliable and innovative manned-unmanned teaming solutions for mission success.” The company developed its HMI with the assistance of pilots and electronic warfare officers and by using comprehensive virtual and constructive simulation testing. The pilot of the crewed aircraft in the flight test stressed the user-friendliness of the HMI. This, affirmed BAE Systems, showed the maturity of its MUM-T technology. The group’s MUM-T programme made use of more than 40 years of experience in flight control systems, and 20 years of experience in developing autonomous systems. “Our deep expertise in developing and fielding safety-critical flight control systems means that safety and assurance are integrated into our MUM-T architecture and software from the ground up,” assured BAE Systems Military Aircraft Systems Development Programme director Matthew Trouve. “This provides the warfighter with the necessary trust and confidence in our solution to operate in the same environment as autonomous unmanned teammates." The architecture for MUM-T was tailor-made by the group, and was assured, open and flexible. Its underlying algorithms allowed autonomous and decentralised decision-making in tactical situations. Consequently, the architecture could be easily adapted to undertake new missions and to integrate future technologies. Further, third parties could incorporate new algorithms and technologies by means of a software development kit.