Transnet Pipelines says the containment processes at Verkykerskop, where there was a major theft-related diesel spill on the multiproduct pipeline in early March, are nearing completion and that rehabilitation efforts have started. Verkykerskop is about 50 km from Harrismith, in the Free State, and the multiproduct pipeline from Durban to Heidelberg runs through the area. The spill, a video of which was widely shared on media and social media platforms, took place in the early hours of the morning of March 9, and it was later confirmed that some of the diesel had flowed into the Meul river. The video showed diesel gushing from the pipeline in broad daylight, leading to questions as to whether there was still pressure in a line that is meant to respond automatically to drops in pressure. Transnet Pipelines’ explanation is that, even when the pipeline is shutdown, there is “line fill which then still flows out the pipeline, dependant on the typography of the land”. The spill sparked significant environmental concern, as the Meul river is a tributary of the Wilge river, which is itself a tributary to the Vaal river. Transnet Pipelines estimates that more than 500 000 litres of diesel was lost, but has not yet calculated how much was stolen and how much either penetrated the soil or flowed into the river. The State-owned entity says emergency teams were immediately deployed to site to contain the spill and recover the product. To limit the water contamination, booms were placed at intervals down the river as “catchment areas” for the spilled fuel and to prevent the spread of diesel downstream. “Their placement has been successful in containing and recovering of  the product,” spokesperson Saret Knoetze says. In addition to the booms, cut off trenches have been dug and absorbents placed in the river to “catch” the diesel. The Verkykerskop spill is but one of 151 sites contaminated over the past three years as a result of 450 fuel-theft incidents. Knoetze says the extent of the environmental damage varies from minimal to major and insists that there is a specific rehabilitation plan to address each site. She also invited landowners who are dissatisfied with these efforts to approach Transnet Pipelines directly. “We have been addressing a number of farmers and as advised, plans are currently under way to expedite the rehabilitation of all remaining sites.” She acknowledges that some plans take longer to execute than others, depending on the extent of the contamination. “Thus far we have closed off on the majority of these sites and are awaiting the necessary closure certificates for some of these from the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment (DFFE). “There are some sites, however, which require extensive rehabilitation.” She also stresses that there is no fixed rehabilitation plan. “The first step is always to contain and recover. “We then, through an external service provider, assess the extent of the damage and contamination; once assessed we develop a remediation and rehabilitation plan and then we execute the plan. “There is no one size fits all as all sites differ, which results in different timeframes.” Knoetze says the specific site plan is discussed with and agreed to with DFFE and the landowner. “We have very specific reporting requirements and have been reporting all incidents to the department as required.”