The Johannesburg Development Agency (JDA) is, along with the City of Johannesburg Department of Public Safety's Emergency Management Services, building a new fire station in Marshalltown. The new Central Fire Station, currently 30% complete, will be a modern space intended to cater for the current and envisaged demands of the community in the inner city of Johannesburg. The fire station will provide a speedy response to fire or rescue incidents that occur in the inner city’s high-rise buildings. The JDA started the new Central Fire Station project in May 2021. The design has been derived from precedents of recently built fire stations, as well as lessons learned to ensure that the design addresses all issues experienced previously by other fire stations. Once completed, the facility will have a contemporary design, incorporating soft and hard roofs, with durable clay facebrick and minimal plastered feature walls. The firefighters and emergency crews for the Central Fire Station are currently housed at Fairview Fire Station to ensure that there is no disruption of service for inner-city residents. "The building is one level, except for a few areas which extend to the first floor, and a six-storey training tower. The facility will be low-maintenance and sustainable, and a landmark of modern design to the surrounding community," the JDA says. Other features of the fire station design include a Basic Emergency Safety and Fire Education Centre, or Be Safe centre, intended to be used as a tool in education regarding fire safety and general safety principles, and an administration block and ablution facilities. The facility will also have a lifting tank for training in how to draft water, and the six-storey training tower, independent of the main building, which will serve as a beacon for the fire station and as a training academy. Further, the fire station will have wash bays for fire trucks, a swimming pool, recreational area for the staff with braai facilities, car parking and a gymnasium. “Some of the project milestones achieved for this facility, since the start of construction, include the relocation of vehicle pound, township establishment approval, the completion of the lifting tank and the completion of the attenuation pond,” City of Johannesburg Development Planning MMC Belinda Echeozonjoku says. The new central fire station will provide access to employment opportunities for local emerging contractors, sourced from the local and adjacent communities in Johannesburg. A total of nine small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMMEs) are currently employed on the project. The project is on track to reach the 30% local spend, as per the City’s policies. The JDA has also made use of an independent SMME mentor to assist, develop and mentor the SMMEs, with the aim of assisting with Construction Industry Development Board upgrades upon completion of the project.