Proposals for amendments to travel requirements by Health Minister Dr Joe Phaahla on March 4, potentially making it easier and cheaper to travel to South Africa, have been welcomed by hospitality industry representative organisation the Federated Hospitality Association of South Africa (Fedhasa). Details of the proposals, which will be presented to the National Coronavirus Command Council (NCCC) in the coming week, will only be available after any proposed new regulations are presented to the NCCC and approved. Fedhasa national chairperson Rosemary Anderson says the removal of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) Covid-19 test requirement for fully vaccinated travellers is imperative if businesses are to begin rebuilding the tourism and hospitality sector. “Many destinations, most recently South Africa’s neighbour Botswana, have already removed the requirement for vaccinated travellers to furnish negative PCR tests.” She adds that ease of accessibility plays a major role in travellers’ decision-making when selecting a destination and the PCR test has always been a major stumbling block hampering inbound travellers, who do not always have easy and affordable access to PCR testing in their own country. In addition, the cost and inconvenience of mandatory PCR tests are exacerbated if travellers are visiting multiple destinations in Southern Africa over a typical two-week or ten-day holiday period, says Anderson. Fedhasa states that it has also been particularly damaging for the cruise line industry as the impossible logistics of organising PCR tests and processing them has reduced South Africa’s attractiveness as an itinerary stop. In this regard, the approval of these proposals would be welcome relief for hospitality businesses which are fighting to rebuild, preserve jobs and contribute to the economy, she says. “Mass unemployment is one of the biggest problems facing South Africa and our sector holds the key to economic growth and job creation. “For us to realise our potential and be the catalyst our economy needs, decisive decisions based on science and global best practice are required sooner rather than later,” says Anderson.