UK-based global major power and propulsion technology and systems group Rolls-Royce and Air bp, the aviation fuels division of global major energy group bp (previously branded BP and also UK-based), have signed an agreement under which the latter will supply sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) to the former. The SAF will be used in tests of gas turbine engines at three Rolls-Royce sites. The sites are Derby, which is focused on civil aerospace engines, Bristol, which specialises in defence aerospace power plants, both of which are in the UK, and Dahlewitz, which concentrates on business aviation engines, and which is located in Germany. The SAF will be mixed with conventional jet fuel, to produce a 10%-SAF and 90%-conventional fuel blend. However, Air bp will also provide the 100% SAF that will be used to fuel Rolls-Royce’s latest-generation and largest civil turbofan engine, the UltraFan, when it makes its first test run later this year. The UltraFan demonstrator will be the biggest aero-engine in the world. Intended to provide unprecedented fuel efficiency and so deliver a new level of aviation sustainability, the UltraFan has been designed to use 100% SAF. “This agreement delivers on a commitment we made that the fuel for testing and development is [sic] a 10% [SAF] blend by 2023,” highlighted Rolls-Royce civil aerospace president Chris Cholerton. “We want to encourage the use of SAF throughout the aviation industry and this agreement is an example of the firm commitments fuel producers require to support their continued production investment. I will be proud and excited to see the UltraFan on our state-of-the-art testbed running for the first time on 100% SAF, creating a new chapter in engineering excellence and sustainable aviation history.” “We are delighted to be supporting Rolls-Royce to achieve their sustainability goals,” affirmed Air bp sustainability director Andreea Moyes. “As bp transitions to an integrated energy company, we are leveraging our expertise in the sourcing of renewable feedstocks, SAF production, logistics and end customer supply. Our ambition is to be the decarbonisation partner in the aviation industry and we are working at pace to promote SAF availability, accessibility and affordability to support global aviation in realising its low carbon emissions.” The SAF that Air bp will supply under this agreement will be mainly derived from waste-based feedstocks, like used cooking oils. The quantities of SAF required will be about three-million litres a year. Deliveries will start this northern summer/southern winter. All Rolls-Royce Trent-family and business jet engines are already cleared and certified to run on 50% SAF blends. The company has pledged to make them compatible with 100% SAF by next year.