Nelson Mandela University (NMU) in February opened a new 500-bed residence for students, which will be followed by the launch of 300-bed and 1 000-bed residences later this year on the Summerstrand campuses. There is a country-wide shortage of on-campus beds at tertiary institutions, and the university has prioritised increasing its on-campus accommodation from 3 870 beds at the start of 2020 to 5 868 by the end of this year. The project is using the novel Peri Uno building method to speed up construction of much-needed student accommodation. There are numerous benefits to the Peri Uno building model chosen by the university, NMU Infrastructure Services and Space Optimisation construction project manager Bill McLachlan says. The new residences in Summerstrand, which is the beachfront suburb where the university has five of its seven campuses, are turnkey projects from design concept through to furniture and finishes. Further, in keeping with the university’s sustainability drive, green opportunities are kept top of mind in all infrastructure projects. Water conservation in particular is key, owing to ongoing drought and intermittent power outages in Nelson Mandela Bay. Hence, boreholes will feed all toilets. The gravity-based water system will help to counter the challenges caused by water and power shortages. Potable water tanks have also been installed in case of emergency, says McLachlan. "The university’s South Campus already has an R18-million green power plant with a 20-year lifespan, built in 2018. The installation of the 2 ha solar photovoltaic (PV) power plant can produce 1 740 MWh/y of electricity." While budget did not allow the incorporation of PV solar panels on the new residences, the three-storey buildings have been constructed to allow for their introduction at a later stage, he adds. MONOLITHIC PERI UNO
Peri Uno, used on a major South African project for the first time, is a maintenance-friendly method of construction, which offers both good ventilation and insulation (dependent on the weather). It is also easy to adapt in terms of extensions or interior changes, says McLachlan. “There is no brickwork in Peri Uno. Walls, columns, slabs and beams are shuttered simultaneously and concreted using a monolithic construction method. All Uno formwork elements are made of aluminium and, thus, very light. The aluminium elements are prefabricated on a project-specific basis and can be assembled without a crane. Floors can be concreted in regular three-day cycles, which speeds up construction.” The method also uses an innovative anchoring technology with reusable anchors that are installed on one side with up to 70% fewer anchor points than comparable systems. “There is fast striking owing to an ingenious transition between wall and slab formwork as well as the drophead which allows early striking,” he says. Peri Uno is also a cost-effective solution for social residential buildings featuring frequently repetitive floor plans, such as the new student accommodation, McLachlan adds. Further, despite more than one stoppage owing to lockdown, and other challenges, civil engineering and construction company Grinaker LTA is on target to hand over the residences before the end of this year. Meanwhile, NMU Physical Planning deputy director Graham Gouws said small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMMEs) are an integral part of the project, working in teams in learning new skills associated with the new Peri Uno building method. “SMMEs were trained up to do the formwork for the Peri Uno method and get some experience on the system. This will enable them to work on any future projects that use the same method,” he notes. Additionally, with demand for reasonably-priced student accommodation far outstripping supply, the university has also intensified its efforts to accredit accommodation in private residences.