Property developer and investor Atterbury has completed the development of a fully-let 6 000 m2, premium-grade office and gym in Pretoria’s Castle Gate precinct. “The latest addition to Castle Gate reflects Atterbury’s ethos for developing mixed-use nodes. Each new property type that we add makes a significant contribution to the overall project at every phase. The excellent interaction between the new workspace, gym and the lifestyle offering is already evident,” says Atterbury development manager Pieter Olivier. The new gym and offices extend the existing Castle Gate Retail Centre, which was the first phase of the Castle Gate precinct development. The centre opened in November 2020 and is performing beyond expectations with its appealing mix of convenient retail, unique restaurants, inviting dining piazza, tailor-made kids play area, green spaces and famous night market. A 2 700 m2 Planet Fitness gym, which opened mid-February, occupies one of the building’s two wings. The other wing comprises three office levels, fully let with a trio of top business names, including the 1 700 m2 head office of law firm VDT Attorneys, a 1 000 m2 regional office for international audit, tax and advisory firm Mazars, and the 500 m2 headquarters of residential property developer Central Developments. “We are particularly pleased to complete this new development at Castle Gate with fully-let offices and excellent uptake at Planet Fitness, showing that it responds to a significant demand that was uncatered for in this neighbourhood,” says Olivier. Castle Gate is a place where people can enjoy a quality lifestyle by having many daily needs - shopping, restaurant, fitness, business and medical - met in one place. The large-scale mixed-use precinct development is expected to represent a total investment of R6-billion and create approximately 750 permanent jobs. The development is being rolled out in response to market demand and will ultimately have 50 000 m2 of retail space, 50 000 m2 of office space, an 18 000 m2 mixed-use business park and 1 300 residential units set in eight hectares of protected green areas with walking and running trails. Castle Gate is a City of Tshwane strategic project in a key Pretoria East in-fill development growth node.