Medical cannabis producer Cilo Cybin Pharmaceuticals has launched South Africa’s first oil-based cannabinoid products with a self-emulsifying drug delivery system, which it says increases efficacy by up to ten times. It also aims to list Africa’s first cannabis special purpose acquisition company (Spac) on the JSE in May with a view to buy companies in the fledgling industry alongside genetics and wearable health-device companies in the US and South Africa. Cannabinoid-based products are on average only about 3% to 6% bioavailable when orally administered, says Cilo Cybin president and CEO Gabriel Theron. “Our smart formulation makes use of cutting-edge drug delivery system technologies, which has enabled Cilo Cybin to increase the cannabinoid bioavailability by up to 30%, significantly increasing the effectiveness of the product,” he explains. Cilo Cybin is the first company in South Africa to win the right to grow, process, package and sell locally manufactured cannabis products and is the only company using nanotechnology to manufacture local oil-based cannabidiol (CBD) products in South Africa, the company notes. Cannabisness Phyto Pharmaceutical technical director and Vaal University of Technology (VUT) senior lecturer Dr Harry Chiririwa comments that, for many South African’s battling daily discomfort, Cilo Cybin’s non-scheduled CBD products now being manufactured in South Africa is exciting. “The use of a new delivery system that is 30% more absorbable than capsules, and oils with a great taste is a significant development. Users of Cilo Cybin’s CBD products can now rely on the most effective delivery system of cannabinoid products in South Africa to provide relief from pain and inflammation, help prevent sleeplessness, enhance energy and promote and induce relaxation in patients,” he says. Cilo Cybin’s cannabis-based products are formulated by Cannabisness in collaboration with the Institute of Chemical and Biotechnology (ICBT) and VUT that collectively form the ICBT-Cannabis Research Division (ICBT-CRD). “The collaboration is critical to ensure the latest scientific approaches to the Cilo Cybin product range. Our aim is to produce high-quality products targeting the endo-cannabinoid system (ECS) and ECS-independent mechanisms of action using the highest quality raw materials and its delicate formulation processes,” says Theron. “Various research institutes, dosing and formulation experts with years of experience provide ongoing and valuable scientific input. We are also engaging and collaborating with doctors to timeously prepare for dosing and treatment of acute and chronic conditions,” he highlights. The company’s CBD products come in two delivery methods, namely the traditional tincture or eyedropper bottle and a vaporiser or smokable pen. According to Theron, traditional oil-based CBD products take 90 to 120 minutes to take effect when ingested. “The vapour product is used if immediate relief is needed, for example from an anxiety attack. The product is inhaled and acts within minutes. Vaping may be seen as controversial; however, as our products are more bioavailable, the frequency of use is reduced. The nano-oil can then be used after the vape, which will take effect within 45 to 60 minutes. “We recommend responsible use and only by persons over 18 years of age,” he adds. MEDICAL PRODUCTS
The Cilo Cybin Pain Assist has anti-inflammatory properties devoid of any psychoactive or sedative effects. The product is formulated making use of a raw full plant extract with an adjusted terpene profile. Research has indicated that acidic cannabinoids are up to 90 times more effective, inhibiting the two major pathways of inflammation. Further, Cilo Cybin Sleep is scientifically formulated to focus primarily on the inducement of sleep. The product targets the major cannabinoid metabolites and their pathways to promote and induce sleep in patients. The formulated combination of sedative phytochemicals facilitates synergetic interactions with major cannabinoid metabolites, which is twice as active and expresses double the binding affinity to the cannabinoid receptor in comparison to the precursory phyto-cannabinoid. This synergy of mechanisms creates what is often referred to as an entourage of effects which assists the ECS to accomplish and maintain homeostasis, the company says. Meanwhile, the company's range of devices and longevity supplements are the first of many to come. Devices include near-infrared light therapy that stimulates improved circulation and cellular respiration. Use of the device lends itself to a variety of applications, Theron states. However, he warns that, with South Africa’s rapid development of the cannabis industry and massive demand, access to quality products is especially difficult. “There is huge potential for the spread of poor-quality products before adequate detection and interventions are possible. Cilo Cybin provides customers with security, product consistency and peace of mind when purchasing and using its products," he states.