Fifth-generation (5G) technology has become the fastest generational roll-out in mobile history, with innovative new use cases accelerating adoption, the GSMA says. By 2022, 5G connections will surpass one-billion and, by 2025, this will reach two-billion. “By the end of 2025, 5G will account for over a fifth of total mobile connections, and more than two in five people globally will live within reach of a 5G network,” GSMA’s 'Mobile Economy Report 2022' states. The unprecedented growth surpasses that of third-generation (3G) and fourth-generation (4G) technology roll-outs. Eighteen months after its launch, 5G accounted for more than 5.5% of mobile connections, compared with the 2.2% penetration of 3G or 4G in the same time frame. Currently, there are nearly 200 live 5G networks in seventy countries, including 68 operators providing 5G fixed wireless access services and 23 delivering standalone 5G services, which is supporting consumer demand propelled by an ever-growing portfolio of 5G-enabled smartphones across various price points. “5G accounts for a much larger share of global mobile connections than 3G or 4G did at the same point in their lifecycles. Momentum has been boosted by factors including innovative plans, video streaming services, rising 5G handset sales and network coverage expansions,” explained GSMA chief technology officer Alex Sinclair. Further, with the launch of 5G services in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa over the last year, the technology is now available in every region of the world, laying the foundation for more growth and more transformation for services. Early network capability initiatives are underway to support the increasing number of innovative consumer and enterprise use cases across the 5G era, including the 5G use of multiple sub-3 GHz spectrum bands, 5G mmWave, 5G Advanced and private networks. To promote adoption and communicate the value 5G delivers for operators, businesses and governments, GSMA launched the GSMA 5G Transformation Hub, which houses several 5G case studies covering the live entertainment; infrastructure; manufacturing; construction; transport; smart cities; and energy sectors.