The next-generation Ford Everest, based on the new Ranger bakkie, made its global debut on Tuesday. The vehicle will be launched in South Africa later this year. The new Everest is to be manufactured in Thailand, with some markets to receive semi-knockdown kits for local assembly. The current Everest model is produced at Ford’s Silverton plant, in Pretoria, for the local and wider sub-Saharan markets, along with the Ford Ranger. Everest production is, however, set to cease when Ford moves to focused, increased new-generation Ranger bakkie production at the South African facility later this year. Three grades of the new Everest will be available at launch, namely Sport, Titanium+ and a new flagship grade, Platinum. The new sports-utility vehicle has a wider track and longer wheelbase, and carries a strong resemblance to the new Ranger, also set to make its debut later this year. High-series models are equipped with wireless charging, a leather trimmed e-shifter and an electric parking brake. Depending on the variant, heated and ventilated ten-way power adjustable memory function seats are available for the driver, and eight-way for the passenger. Heated seats are also available for the second row, depending on the variant. Additionally, all occupants now have storage space and, depending on the model, are able to charge their devices with power outlets in all three rows of seats. The second-row slides with a 60:40 split seatback and the 50:50-split third row, in the seven-seater configuration can be folded at the touch of a button on high series models. Both the second- and third-row seats have been designed to fold flat to allow for long loads. To stop items falling out of the back when the tailgate is lifted, the design team created a small lip, known as the apple catcher, at the rear of the cargo area. The team also created an underfloor storage space that helps keep the rear of the Everest organised. Depending on trim level, the new Everest comes with 8-inch or 12.4-inch digital instrument panels that replace the traditional analogue clusters. The vehicle also features large, high-resolution portrait 10.1- or 12-inch touchscreens. It also offers the latest Sync system, which comes with voice-activated communications, entertainment and information systems. Additionally, there is an embedded factory-fitted modem, allowing customers to connect to their vehicles when linked with the FordPass app. FordPass offers features like remote start, vehicle status check, and remote lock and unlock functions via a mobile device. The portrait-orientated screen is also linked to a 360-degree camera with split-view display to ensure easier parking, or to assist when negotiating particularly tricky terrain. In addition, customers can control Everest’s new exterior zone lighting system via the touchscreen or FordPass, which means they don’t have to park, work or camp in the dark. Engine Line-up
Ford has refined its 3-l turbodiesel V6 engine for the Everest. It is one of three turbodiesel engine options available at launch, depending on the market. Also available are the single-turbo and the bi-turbo 2-l inline four-cylinder diesel engines and a 2.3-l EcoBoost petrol engine. Depending on the model, either a six-speed automatic or a ten-speed SelectShift automatic will be available. The new Everest also comes with a choice of two four-wheel drive systems, underbody protection and off-road selectable drive modes, plus rear locking differential, two tow hooks upfront, and upfitter switches for accessories. Depending on the market, Everest is also available with two-wheel drive. Where available, Everest’s dedicated off-road screen displays vehicle information and a front camera view of the terrain ahead, with predictive overlay guidelines designed to help the driver negotiate obstacles. With a single button press, drivers can view their driveline and diff-lock indicators, steering angle and guides, and vehicle roll-and-pitch angles. The new Everest has a water wading ability up to 800 mm and a maximum braked trailer towing capability of up to 3 500 kg. A dedicated tow/haul drive mode has been tuned to optimise gear shift timing to maintain the best power delivery and engine braking when carrying loads, either in a trailer or in the cargo area, says Ford. In addition, an integrated electric trailer brake controller helps to control the trailer’s brake system. Driver Assist Technologies
The new Everest has a new far-side airbag positioned between the driver and front passenger, providing additional protection in the event of a side impact. Other additions/technologies include active park assist to help the driver fit in tight spaces at the press of a button. The system takes care of the steering, gearshifts, acceleration and braking to navigate into parallel or perpendicular parking spaces. It will also steer itself out of a parallel parking spot when prompted. Adaptive cruise control with stop-and-go allows drivers to maintain a preset speed and distance from the car ahead. It will also bring the car to a complete stop if required. Lane centring is able to detect lane markings and help keep the vehicle centred in the lane. Intelligent adaptive cruise control also adds speed sign recognition to automatically adjust the vehicle’s speed to the posted speed limit. A new lane-keeping system with road-edge detection helps keep the Everest from drifting from the road in rural areas. Evasive steer assist, designed to operate at city and freeway speeds, uses radar and a camera to detect slower-moving and stationary vehicles ahead and provides steering support to enable drivers to move around a vehicle if a collision is imminent. Reverse brake assist helps drivers to reverse into parking spots and other tight spaces by providing audible and visual warnings. It can also detect a vehicle crossing, or a cyclist or pedestrian behind the vehicle. The system can also bring the Everest to a complete stop if the driver does not react in time. Blind spot information system with trailer coverage, monitors blind spots around the vehicle and trailer, alerting the driver of any perceived hazards. Pre-collision assist with intersection functionality can automatically apply the brakes to avoid or mitigate the effects of accidents if the driver is turning across the path of oncoming traffic and the system determines an imminent collision. 