The South African (SA) Mint, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the South African Reserve Bank, has launched the lion design in the second series of the Big 5 coin range to coincide with the advent of the 2022 World Money Fair in Berlin, Germany. This is the second animal theme to be released in the second series of the Big 5 collectable coin range, following the elephant design that was issued in August 2021. The second-series Big 5 coin range unveils the long awaited second portrait design of the obverse, while the reverse design remains unchanged from that of the first series. This split portrait features a unique construct, which reveals a complete portrait of a lion only when placed side by side with another coin. In this way, an entire pride can be built by placing multiple coins next to each other, the SA Mint points out. The stunning obverse design for the second series shows the lion in a different light from the first series in that the focus is on the graceful beauty of these regal animals. This coin is yet another proud continuation of a series that features the highest standards of artistry in both design and modelling, it adds. This limited-edition series is, once again, offered in fine-silver, 24 ct gold and platinum. The silver offering includes a 1 oz, which is available in brilliant uncirculated quality and packed in a colourful blister folder that incorporates the printed image of a lion. The proof quality 1 oz is encapsulated in a double capsule that shows the split portrait on the reverse completing the image of a single animal. Similar to the first series, the gold lion will be available in a 1 oz proof quality packaged in a single box. In the second series, the gold range is extended to include a 1/4 oz proof quality coin which is available either as a single coin or in a double coin set. Both the silver and gold 1 oz Big 5 proof coins are available in a combination set with either a gold or silver 1 oz Krugerrand that bears a privy mark featuring a lion. The 1 oz platinum proof coin is available in a single packaging. “It is very exciting to introduce the lion coin, the latest in the second series of the award-winning collection. The Big 5 series has proven itself to be an iconic range of coins for collectors worldwide and announcing the release of the lion at the esteemed World Money Fair is the ideal platform to amplify it to the world. “The lion, universally known as the king of the jungle, embodies the indomitable spirit and pride of Africa. As we see the recovery of the world economy and that of South Africa in general, we are very eager to continue to demonstrate the strength and beauty of the African continent through the amazing Big 5 series," says SA Mint MD Honey Mamabolo.