Stellenbosch University (SU) will launch its online supplementary education platform SU Advantage on March 17. The platform was developed to support high school learners on their journey toward university preparation and academic success. SU Advantage provides learning support and tutorship to learners in grades 10, 11 and 12 across eleven subjects typically required for university admission. “Our platform is built following a four-step approach to learning to provide effective results to users,” says SU Centre for Pedagogy (Suncep) director Dr Benedict Khoboli. “Firstly, engaging, short-form video lessons are used to present crucial topics in each subject to learners in a format they prefer to consume content. Secondly, topic-based assessments and quizzes are used to measure the extent of learners’ initial understanding of the content presented. “Thirdly, consolidated workbooks and memo-based reconciliation are used to measure their understanding of key concepts and to improve their fundamental comprehension of specific topics. Finally, it also boasts interactive live lessons in all subjects where subject experts solidify the concepts learners were exposed to in video lessons and other learning materials,” he says. During the Covid-19 pandemic, the Suncep supported thousands of learners through funded initiatives by giving them access to online supplementary education platforms. The initiatives were highly successful, which led SU to develop a similar solution for the private market. SU aimed to create a learning environment that speaks directly to the modern way in which learners embrace technology while incorporating proven pedagogical principles in a system geared towards assisting them in improving their school performance, the university says. During the launch event, the platform will be demonstrated to selected SU staff members and invited members of the media. SU Law Trust Chair in Social Justice Professor Thuli Madonsela is also expected to give a keynote address at the event.