Earlier this week UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson reaffirmed that nuclear energy would form a major element in Britain’s future energy system, because it was clean, reliable and safe. He did so at a roundtable with nuclear sector companies, which he hosted at his official office and residence, 10 Downing Street. “He set out [his] government’s commitment to supporting the industry to develop a thriving pipeline of future nuclear projects in the UK in a cost-effective way,” stated the UK government press release. "Industry representatives set out the various technologies and projects they are developing, from larger nuclear power plants to small modular reactors, capitalising on both British and international expertise.” Johnson sought input from the industry representatives on how the country could accelerate the deployment of new nuclear power plants. Issues, such as removing barriers to development and scaling up investment, were discussed. Government and industry agreed to work together to increase the speed and reduce the cost of making projects operational. “Accelerating nuclear projects is absolutely essential to keep energy costs down, cut expensive gas imports and strengthen our energy security as we move towards net-zero [carbon emissions],” (UK) Nuclear Industry Association (NIA) CE Tom Greatrex told the World Nuclear News (WNN) website. “That means urgently investing in a fleet of large and small nuclear stations, alongside renewable investment, to deliver the clean, sovereign power we need.” WNN noted that nuclear currently provided 16% of the UK’s electricity, but that almost half of this capacity is due to be retired by 2025, and all but one of the remaining reactors were scheduled for retirement by 2030. The British government is reported not merely to seek to replace this capacity, but to increase nuclear’s share of the country’s electricity generation to 25%. In addition to the NIA, industry attendees at the roundtable included Aviva Investors, Balfour Beatty, Bechtel Group, EDF Energy, GE Hitachi Nuclear Energy, L&G, Mace, (UK) Nuclear Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre, Nuclear Power Jacobs, NuScale, Rolls-Royce, Rothesay Life, Westinghouse Electric, and Urenco. The roundtable took place only days before the release of the UK’s Energy Security Strategy, which is expected next week.