French aerospace group Dassault Aviation has announced yet another order for its Rafale multirole (the company likes to describe it as ‘omnirole’) fighter. This contract is a repeat order from Greece, for another six of the aircraft. In January last year, Greece had ordered 18 Rafales, so the new order takes the number the country is acquiring to 24. That first order was composed of 12 second-hand aircraft and six new-built ones. The new order is also for new-built aircraft. “This new contract demonstrates the Greek government’s confidence in the Rafale, which is already actively contributing to guaranteeing Greece’s sovereignty and operational independence," said Dassault Aviation chairperson and CEO Eric Trappier. “Once again, I am honoured by the Hellenic Air Force’s renewed trust in Dassault Aviation, reflecting nearly half a century of unwavering partnership. I would also like to assure the Greek authorities of our full commitment to fully meet their expectations.” The first six second-hand Rafales, ordered under the first contract, arrived in Greece in January this year. The remaining 12 aircraft in that deal, including the new-built ones, will all be delivered by the northern summer of next year. The newly-ordered second batch of six new-built aircraft will be delivered during the northern summer of 2024. The first batch of Rafales has, aviation media have reported, been assigned to the Hellenic Air Force’s 332 ‘Hawk’ All Weather Squadron at the Tanagra Air Base (near Thebes, north of Athens). The Rafales are replacing the squadron’s Dassault Mirage 2000 fighters. The first Dassault type to be operated by units at Tanagra was the Mirage F1, which entered service in 1975, and was later replaced by the Mirage 2000. The new contract was signed in Athens by Trappier and by Greek Ministry of Defence Armaments and Investments director-general Vice Admiral Aristidis Alexopoulos, in the presence of the two countries’ Defence Ministers. “As a European country and [North Atlantic Treaty Organisation] member, Greece is a major strategic ally of France,” noted Dassault in its statement on the deal.