Fully integrated mining, construction and environmental law and consultancy firm NSDV has promoted three senior employees after growing the firm from three founding members, to 28 legal and corporate consultants and support staff over the past three years. NSDV co-founder and director Lili Nupen says growing the business during the Covid-19 pandemic climate was challenging, but that the firm’s philosophy towards people and their growth has enabled it to reward exceptional leadership and avoid the usual “bide-your-time” gauntlet many legal practitioners face. “We offer an intimate team structure that does not rely on traditional hierarchy and policies to reward exceptional results for our clients,” she adds. Samantha Reyneke has been promoted from general commercial litigator – operating particularly within the realms of disputes arising from construction and engineering, business rescue, and product liability – to construction department director. “Reyneke will help manage and grow the construction and dispute resolution department, generating bespoke construction contracts across Africa. Her attention to detail, industry knowledge, and natural leadership abilities make her the perfect director for our department,” says NSDV co-founder and construction director Cameron Staude. Reyneke, who started her legal career in 2006, says she is excited to be growing into a bigger role at a firm that she “truly believes in and loves working at”. Muhammed Khan moves from his role as senior associate to mining and environmental law department director. “A great part of [Khan’s] professional success lies in his ability to combine amassed regulatory knowledge with his experience in negotiating, drafting, and reviewing various complex commercial contracts,” notes Nupen. Khan says that while it is always great to have an established practice, culture is critical. “NSDV’s culture allows people to grow at their own pace with as much support as is needed.” Lastly, after only six months in her previous role as associate, Sarah Forshaw has been promoted to construction department senior associate. “My learning, growth, and development over the last six months has been exponential. I attribute this to my amazing leader, Staude, who has taught me so much with great patience and kindness,” she says.