Ireland-based global aviation services company ASL Aviation Holdings (ASL) confirmed on Thursday that it had ordered 20 more Boeing 737-800BCF freighter aircraft. BCF stands for ‘Boeing Converted Freighter’, meaning that the aircraft concerned were originally built as airliners. The new order was divided into firm orders for ten of the aircraft, with options on the remaining ten. ASL is a joint venture (JV) partner and associate of South African operator FlySafair. The Irish group also owns ASL Airlines Belgium, ASL Airlines France, ASL Airlines Ireland and ASL Airlines United Kingdom, as well as a number of leasing companies. Moreover, it is a JV partner and associate of Thai operator K-Mile Asia. “This new order is an important element of our fleet renewal programme, and we are delighted to expand our partnership with Boeing on the 737-800BCF,” affirmed ASL CE Dave Andrew. “The aircraft has proven itself to be an excellent fit with our customer and operational requirements throughout our European network of 100 airports. The 737-800BCF offers increased reliability and performance, and equally its lower fuel burn reduces our environmental footprint. This is very important to ASL as an aviation group committed to environmental sustainability in aviation.” “We are honoured to play a crucial role in the fleet renewal under way across ASL Aviation Holdings’ operation,” stated Boeing Commercial Freighters director Jens Steinhagen. “Boeing Converted Freighters support progress towards sustainability goals by providing operators like those under the ASL Group umbrella an economical way to replace less efficient, older-generation freighters.” ASL first ordered the 737-800BCF in June 2019. That contract was also for ten firm orders and ten options. The options were converted into firm orders in February 2021. The first 737-800BCF was delivered to ASL in January 2021. Eleven of this first batch of 20 have now been received by the group, and these have been distributed to ASL Airlines Belgium, ASL Airlines France and K-Mile Asia. Two more are currently undergoing conversion. The rest will follow thereafter, with the last expected to be delivered early next year. The aircraft covered by the latest order will be converted at two locations: the Boeing-approved STAECO facility in Jinan, China, and the Boeing maintenance, repair and overhaul facility at London’s Gatwick Airport in the UK. Conversion work on the first of the aircraft is scheduled to start during the second quarter of next year. The 737-800BCF can carry 23.9 t of cargo and has a range of up to 3 750 km.