Telecommunications giant MTN South Africa is investing R820-million to modernise its network and deploy new infrastructure across Limpopo and Mpumalanga. The investment is directed to MTN’s Modernisation of Network South Africa project (Monza), as well as rural reach and fifth-generation (5G) expansion plans and the restoration of vandalised network infrastructure. “Our aim is to significantly enhance access and open the door to new digital opportunities for many more people across the province. Our investment is specifically targeted at increasing network coverage, improving throughputs and connecting the previously unconnected,” said MTN South Africa Northern Region GM Kagiso Moncho, noting that the investment will also benefit ultra-rural villages such as Mtititi and Ga Marishane. The Monza rollout in the two provinces will include improvement and modernisation of 230 sites and 76 new site builds to add to the existing 1 850, while the extension of MTN’s 5G connectivity includes rolling out 58 new sites in 2022 to add to the existing 53. “Another major highlight of the expansion drive will be rural connectivity to help close the digital access gaps in South Africa. “We have extensive plans to drive growth and connectivity solutions into under-serviced areas, including Mtititi and Ga Marishane village in Jan Furse. With unemployment in South Africa reaching new peaks, it is critical to focus on harnessing digital solutions to drive the recovery, especially in those areas that were hardest hit,” Moncho added. Meanwhile, owing to high incidences of vandalism and battery theft, MTN partnered with Bidvest Security and set aside an additional R101-million in 2022 to combat the criminality. “Ensuring users receive quality and network stability is our number one aim, but the fight against battery theft and vandalism remains a major hindrance. I am pleased that our ongoing efforts to make a dent in these criminal acts are seeing change, but all South Africans are requested to remain vigilant and report any suspicious activity,” Moncho commented.