The Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment (DFFE) has opened channels for the public to comment on the 'Standard for the Development of Power Lines and Substations within Identified Geographical Areas Revision of August 2021', which negates the need for environmental assessments in certain instances in which power lines and substations will be developed. The public consultation process was launched through the publication, on April 7, of Government Gazette 46209 in terms of the National Environmental Management Act. The development of the standard by the DFFE is based on two strategic environmental assessment processes undertaken for the development of electricity grid infrastructure in South Africa. Public comment is also invited for the proposed exclusion of certain identified activities necessitated for the development or expansion of power line and substation infrastructure from the requirement to obtain environmental authorisation, based on compliance with the standard. The exclusion from the requirement to obtain environmental authorisation applies in areas identified by the national Web-based environmental screening tool as being of medium or low environmental sensitivity. In addition, such exclusions are in line with identified environmental themes within the strategic transmission corridors for the development or expansion of electricity transmission and distribution powerline infrastructure and substations published by the DFFE in 2018 and 2021. This applies to instances where the development or expansion of power lines and/or substations triggers the requirement for an environmental-impact assessment (EIA). The standard and the exclusions do, however, not apply where any part of the infrastructure occurs on an environmentally-sensitive area, or where the greater part of the proposed infrastructure falls outside any strategic transmission corridor. Where the standard applies, and an EIA is required, pertains to areas that are classified as highly sensitive. The DFFE notes that failure to comply with the requirements of the standard will constitute an offence in terms of the EIA regulations. The department also points out that an environmental authorisation issued prior to the commencement of the standard and the Gazetted notice on April 7 remains valid.