Global major aircraft leasing group Air Lease Corporation (ALC) has confirmed an order for a further 32 Boeing 737 MAX single-aisle airliners, the manufacturer announced on Monday. The order will include both the 737-8 and 737-9 versions of the MAX, although the numerical breakdown between the two marks was not revealed. This order is ALC’s second for the Boeing type so far this year. In February, it had contracted for 18 of the aircraft. That same month, the imminence of this latest order was signalled by the signing of a memorandum of understanding (MoU) between the two groups. With the confirmation of this order, ALC now has an order backlog of 130 MAXs. “Following our [MoU] with Boeing in February for these 32 737 MAX aircraft, we are pleased to announce the signing of this definitive purchase agreement,” said ALC president and CEO John L Plueger. “We believe that the economic and operating advantages of the 737 MAX will serve our airline customers well as they favour modern, fuel efficient aircraft.” The group was increasing the numbers of 737 MAXs it had on order to meet increasing demand as the air travel market recovered, following the Covid-19 pandemic. In parallel, there was also an increasing demand from airlines for more modern, fuel-efficient and thus sustainable airliners. The 737 MAX cut fuel burn and carbon emissions by at least 20% in comparison to previous generation aircraft. “The 737 MAX family has already proved its value within ALC’s narrowbody portfolio, providing operators with excellent fuel efficiency and flexibility across different networks,” observed Boeing Commercial Sales & Marketing senior VP Ihssane Mounir. “The addition of more 737 MAXs, including 737-8s and 737-9s, will enable ALC to respond to accelerating market demand as air travel continues to recover.” Boeing affirmed that the 737 MAX family allowed airline fleet optimisation over a broad spectrum of missions. The aircraft permitted operators to open new routes and more direct routes for their passengers.