South African scientific organisation the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and Flemish research organisation VITO on April 5 signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on renewable energy. This signing, at the CSIR’s campus, in Pretoria, formed part of the visit to South Africa by a delegation that included Flanders Minister-President Jan Jambon, as South Africa and Belgium aim to strengthen bilateral relations in various areas around science, technology and innovation. South Africa and Flanders signed a bilateral cooperation in science and technology in 1996, and there have been several successful projects undertaken since then, as well as a collaboration between universities and research organisations. Speaking at the signing, CSIR CEO Dr Thulani Dlamini expressed his gratitude to Flanders for its support and indicated that he was hopeful that this MoU would further strengthen science and innovation initiatives between the two countries, as well as provide new areas to explore. He indicated that the CSIR and VITO shared similar goals in terms of sustainability, as well as science, technology and innovation. Dlamini also highlighted the close collaboration between Flemish and South African universities. Moreover, he called for this to be scaled up, to allow it to be expanded to historically disadvantaged institutions. He also indicated that South Africa and Flanders shared similarities in the economic sectors of renewable energy, the hydrogen economy, marine science and big data and digital technology. He noted that this MoU presented a strategic opportunity to accelerate the opportunities provided by these sectors. Jambon indicated that the two countries could learn a lot from each other, with a well-established partnership that dates back to the nineties. He also lauded the collaboration at a university level, with common research, and lots of exchanges in both directions of students and teachers. In terms of the MoU specifically, he said the two organisations also had a lot to offer each other, especially in terms of collaboration on green hydrogen. Dlamini said the CSIR and VITO had been collaborating on several areas, which the MoU sought to expand upon. Currently, this includes establishing an energy storage testing facility and the National Cleaner Production Centre which provides energy transition support especially for small and medium-sized enterprises. He expanded on the former, which is a project currently being undertaken at the CSIR, to establish an indoor battery testing facility. Dlamini indicated that considerable financial and non-financial support for this project was being provided by Flanders, with the CSIR co-funding. He acclaimed that this was a strategic investment to make in the country, as it would enable it to assess the latest storage technology and innovation, and provide opportunities to bring these solutions to the local market. Moreover, it would introduce new skills and development through the partnership with VITO. This project started in 2021, and while establishment of the facility had been delayed by the pandemic, it was highlighted as progressing well and was slated to be established by the end of this year. Also speaking at the signing ceremony, Higher Education, Science and Innovation Minister Dr Blade Nzimande emphasised the importance of energy storage solutions as South Africa, and other countries, look to scale up renewable energy, and opportunities presented in storage, transport and even export. Dlamini said that, further to these areas, the CSIR also wanted to look at other areas in which to engage VITO. As alluded to earlier, he indicated that discussions on climate change, marine technology and solutions to fly ash were being held. Therefore, this MoU is expected to engender gains in capital capabilities, human capabilities and international collaboration, as the countries embark on their decarbonisation processes. The signing was followed by a tour of the CSIR’s Solar Photovoltaic Reliability Laboratory, as well as its Coin Cell Testing Facility/Hydrogen Research Laboratory at the campus in Pretoria.