Beverage company South African Breweries (SAB) has pledged to donate funds towards assisting with relief efforts in KwaZulu-Natal, it announced on April 25. SAB’s brewery in Prospecton was affected by the flooding in the province during April. “Our Prospecton brewery has been the soul of our operations in KwaZulu-Natal since 1974, which suffered major damage due to flooding. Our team on the ground remains resilient in the face of this crisis and we have big plans for this brewery’s future despite the infrastructural setback,” said SAB corporate affairs VP Zoleka Lisa. The brewer, nevertheless, decided to also extend support to the local community. The bulk of SAB’s donation – about R500 000 – will be offered by the Castle Lager brand to nonprofit organisation (NPO) Gift of the Givers through Business Unity South Africa. “Gift of the Givers are on the ground right now making sure donations go directly to the people who need them most in a way that matters most. [Gift of the Givers founder] Dr Imtiaz Sooliman and his people have always been South Africa’s greatest champions and we fully support them in any way we can in this endeavour,” Lisa said. Considering SAB’s nationwide value chain, and the businesses that form a key part of its downstream value, SAB will be donating funds to the KwaZulu-Natal Liquor Board as well. The company said that, because many liquor trading businesses had been devastated by the floods, the donation would be handed out in the form of food parcels to those who depended on the affected establishments to survive – such as owners, workers and their families. “We hope to prove ourselves to our employees and our communities in KwaZulu-Natal in these trying times,” Lisa added. From an operational perspective, SAB Prospecton brewery plant manager Raidah Vaid said all teams had proudly returned to site to help piece the brewery back together. “Seeing the determination and teamwork in action to get us back on our feet has been truly heart-warming. Just like after the July 2021 looting, it is the resilience of our people that will ensure we overcome this challenge and rise again to be the best brewery.” Lisa added that SAB would continue with its plans to channel R650-million into the expansion of the brewery, as it resumed operations. She said SAB believed in the enormous potential of the operation to contribute to the growth of the province. The Prospecton brewery expansion included a new flavoured alcohol beverage blending plant, which would provide full-time employment for 56 people with new skills development drives aimed at upskilling workers on new processes. “An exciting future lies before us as we invest in the potential and capability of our operations in this province. Prospecton brewery and KwaZulu-Natal have always been a bastion of our business,” Lisa concluded, urging others to donate to Gift of the Givers as well.