The South African National Energy Development Institute (SANEDI) has announced new board appointments, following the expiration of the prior board’s term. The new board, appointed by Mineral Resources and Energy Minister Gwede Mantashe, comprises ten members, who hold experience across various industries such as clean energy, intellectual property and chemical engineering. Notably, the new chairperson Sicelo Xulu previously served as MD of City Power Johannesburg and CEO of the South African Institute of Electrical Engineers. He brings to SANEDI more than two decades of engineering experience. He expresses, in a statement, his eagerness to come up with clean energy solutions and enable South Africa to get closer to a carbon-neutral future. He plans on providing solutions to the country’s “pain points” such as load-shedding, the just energy transition and improving efficiencies. Deputy chairperson Lungile Mtiya is an expert human resources practitioner with more than ten years’ experience in labour relations, labour law and bargaining councils. The other board members are Abegail Boikhutso, Tumelo Mashabela, Ilze Baron, Jongikhaya Witi, Mthokozisi Mpofu, Noma Qase, Gerhard Fourie and Olga Chauke. Chauke hails from the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment, with expertise in climate change mitigation in various sectors, while Fourie represents the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition, and has experience in green industries. Witi will represent the Gauteng Department of Environmental Affairs, and leverage his experience from working at multiple professional bodies – Water Institute of South Africa and the National Association for Clean Air. Boikhutso brings financial skills to the board, while Mpofu and Qase will represent the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy, contributing knowledge from the energy infrastructure and renewable energy spheres. Mashabela adds to the board more than ten years’ experience in intellectual property, while she still serves as member of the South African Institute of Intellectual Property Law.