Chemical and energy multinational Sasol says applications for its corporate bursary programme for the 2023 academic year are now open to high-performing mathematics and science learners currently in Grade 12, who are invited to apply for an all-inclusive bursary to study engineering and science degrees at approved South African universities. Sasol is looking for learners who want to study towards a B Eng or BSc Eng in various engineering disciplines, BSc in Chemistry or learners interested in Mining Survey at a university of technology. “This year, we are also particularly excited to welcome applicants in the green hydrogen space,” says Sasol corporate bursary services graduate centre manager Monica Luwes. “It is essential for Sasol to invest in today’s talent for a prosperous tomorrow, and we are excited to offer bright young South Africans the opportunity to harness their potential and shape a high-performing, world-class workforce.” Applicants need to obtain 70% for mathematics, 70% for science and 60% for English to be considered for an undergraduate bursary. Candidates who are either completing or have completed a degree and wishing to pursue a Master or Doctorate study in science or chemical engineering are also eligible to apply for a postgraduate bursary, the company says. Sasol’s bursary programme, which has run for more than three decades, covers bursars’ tuition fees, accommodation, meals, textbooks and pocket money. Bursars receive allowances for study tools such as laptops and calculators. The bursary will also provide psycho-social support, to enable learners to successfully complete their academic studies, it highlights. Sasol bursars also have the opportunity to do paid vacation work and to be part of the Sasol Development Programmes when they complete their studies, it adds. “Education is one of the key pillars in Sasol’s social investment strategy, with an emphasis on helping to develop a science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) skills base for the future and giving talented, ambitious people from all backgrounds opportunities to succeed,” the company says. Sasol will fund 275 bursars for the 2023 academic year. “At Sasol, education and skills development is one of our key social investment areas and we are committed to supporting learners’ tertiary education and giving them a platform to launch a successful career and future in STEM,” Luwes says.