Innovative applications of smart technologies is an integral part of the solution to reducing the number of fatalities in South Africa’s mining sector, and telecommunications giant Vodacom is introducing a connected, track-and-trace wearable device for mineworkers that could help meet the industry’s zero-harm ambitions. In mid-2021, the first successful trial of the Connected Worker solution by Vodacom Business was introduced to an undisclosed global mining company with various operations across the country. “The solution centres on a connected, track-and-trace wearable device for mineworkers, with a linked data-insights dashboard that gives real-time feedback to health and safety officers,” said Vodacom Mining Resources and Manufacturing managing executive Thando Sibindi. During the trial, Vodacom deployed 8 000 devices which enabled better oversight and management of worker safety, team productivity and the resource scheduling of contractors. “It goes without saying that improved safety and productivity are an added benefit which, in turn, results in cost savings for the operator in the long run,” Sibindi added. The easy-to-wear smart device, which is based on NarrowBand Internet of Things (IoT) technology, resembles a smartwatch that can be hooked onto a mineworker’s personal protective equipment. Its features include a device-battery status and GPS location, hazardous-gas sensors, fall and no-motion detection and a panic button. “This means the device will log an alert in real-time if the worker presses the panic button, falls or is injured and is not moving, enabling a rapid emergency response that could save a life,” Sibindi explained. “Should the worker enter a hazardous or restricted area – these are geofenced on a digitised map by the company ahead of device deployment – it will trigger a notification so they can move back to safety.” For the mining operator, having real-time insights of each worker’s whereabouts in the mine is indispensable. “This not only serves as an added safety measure to keep workers out of danger, but it also allows the company to see how much time is spent in assigned areas of production by various workers to help improve overall productivity and increase effective resource scheduling.” The operator will have incident reports for an overview of their site’s health and safety environment, including daily incident reports of gas detection over the previous 24 hours. “The reality is ‘fit for the future’ companies across various industries are embracing IoT technology solutions because they have started reaping the benefits of an IoT-led future,” added Sibindi, noting that the global number of connected IoT devices is growing rapidly, with expectations that it could exceed 27-billion by 2025, from 11.3-billion in 2020.