The continuing global mobility movement away from fossil fuels means that more of us will drive battery electric vehicles (BEVs) sooner than we probably may imagine. Experts have spoken about consumers’ range anxiety – will my BEV make it to my destination before the juice runs out? – or the fear about finding an available charging station once you have hit the road. While most of these issues are being addressed through either an expanding charging network, or rapidly growing electrified vehicle (EV) range, very few auto makers have explained what it means to own in EV in terms of maintenance. Once you have bought your first EV, what must you do to look after it? After all, there is no oil to check, and very few moving parts as there is no internal combustion engine (ICE). In fact, must the vehicle be serviced at all? Engineering News Online (ENO) asked BMW Group South Africa (BMW) some questions on what it means to look after a BEV. ENO: I have just bought my first BEV. Do I need to have the vehicle serviced at regular intervals, or only bring it in when something is wrong?
BMW: All BMW Group vehicles (bar the Mini One) are sold with a warranty, and a five-year/100 000 km motor plan. The individual service requirements might vary from model to model, but all vehicles require regular service and maintenance to ensure they remain in an optimum operating and roadworthy condition. On a BEV this could be as simple as an annual vehicle inspection, the replacement of wiper blades, or a brake fluid flush. BMW Group vehicles’ condition-based services are based, among other parameters, on both time and mileage driven. The vehicle continually monitors the condition of all operating parameters and determines the date and mileage of the next applicable service based on usage and the vehicle operating conditions. Typically, we quote 20 000 km or around 18 months on modern BMWs and Minis. ENO: Does BMW need to service my BEV, or can any service facility do it?
BMW: As it is a very specialised vehicle with potentially dire consequences for untrained service personnel, due to the high voltage (HV) nature of the drivetrain, it is recommended that the vehicle be maintained by a suitably trained and equipped BMW or Mini dealer. It is understandable that emergency work may need to be carried out from time to time, and getting to a dealer may not always be possible, but special caution must be given to anything related to the HV components, drivetrain and battery. If any emergency repairs are completed, information and documentation detailing the nature of the work need to be kept. ENO: A BEV has no internal combustion engine and, therefore, much fewer moving parts. What then needs to be serviced on the vehicle?
BMW: While you are correct on the serviceability and operation of BEVs versus ICE vehicles, BEVs still require regular service and maintenance regimes. Also, some EVs come with a small ICE for range extension that requires the same service parameters as a petrol or diesel engine vehicle. As mentioned at question one, above, items such as wiper blades, brake pads and discs, brake fluid, tyres, wheel bearings, coolant, for example, may all require inspection and monitoring over the life of the vehicle. Depending on the technology of the battery, one could have liquid-based closed-circuit cooling systems, or air-conditioned cooling systems that may require inspection for leaks. ENO: Will my warranty, battery warranty included, be voided if I don't service my BEV?
BMW: It will, yes, as the vehicle warranty is contingent on the need and requirements for regular vehicle maintenance. Each warranty claim, however, stands on its own merit and will be investigated for the potential cause of the failure. If the failure can be linked to non-service, the warranty on that component and for that claim will not be honoured. ENO: Will a BEV service be less expensive than when I service my ICE vehicle?
BMW: This would depend on the specifications of your current or previous vehicle, however, as per your statements on the differences between BEV and ICE engines, the overall service costs may be less. But, please remember: service costs are determined by the labour and parts required. Each job is priced on recommended labour units and required parts per specific repair instruction. ENO: Will a BEV service take as long as an ICE service, or will it be short and sweet?
BMW: The duration of the service is determined by the specific repair instruction. The timing will depend on the work required during the workshop visit. ENO: What parts will need to be replaced first, and the most often, on a BEV? Will all of these be covered by my service plan? What will not be covered by my service plan?
BMW: As this is condition based, it is very difficult to say what will be required first. BMW and (most) Mini motor plans will cover all requirements until 100 000 km or five years, and this may be extended up to seven years and/or 200 000 km. The BMW and Mini motor plans typically do not cover fuel, top-up oil, tyres and damages. Depending on the EV purchased, the fuel and top-up oil conditions may not apply. ENO:  I am an avid petrolhead. Will I be able to work on my BEV myself?
BMW: Due to the danger to life associated with working on HV systems, it is recommended that any BEV be maintained by a suitably trained and equipped BMW or Mini dealer. While it is understandable emergency work may need to be carried out, such as changing a tyre, special precaution must be given to anything related to the electrical and electronic components, drivetrain and battery. For this reason, access to any of the drivetrain components is typically not possible outside of HV-equipped BMW and Mini servicing dealerships.