The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reported on Thursday that an international team of experts it had sent to South Africa had completed its long term operation (LTO) safety review of the Koeberg nuclear power plant (NPP), near Cape Town. Koeberg is owned and operated by national electricity utility Eskom. The Koeberg NPP had two reactors, the first of which (Unit 1) started commercial operation in 1984, followed by the second (Unit 2) in 1985. Eskom wanted to extend their operational life by another 20 years, to 2045, to give a total operational lifetime of 60 years for both units. The IAEA had been invited to send the team, known as a ‘Safety Aspects of Long Term Operation’ (SALTO) review mission, by South Africa’s Department of Mineral Resources and Energy. The purpose of the SALTO mission was to review essential safety aspects regarding Koeberg’s proposed life extension. The IAEA numbered ten experts, eight from Argentina, Belgium, the Czech Republic, France, Hungary, Pakistan, Spain, Sweden, and two of the agency’s own staff members. It executed its mission over the period March 22 to March 31. “We observed that staff at the plant is professional, open and receptive to suggestions for improvement,” reported IAEA senior nuclear safety officer and SALTO team leader Gabor Petofi. “Despite challenges, the plant has eliminated several deviations from IAEA Safety Standards in ageing management activities and preparation for safe LTO identified during the Pre-SALTO mission in 2019. The SALTO team encourages Eskom and the plant management to address further findings made by this latest mission and to implement all remaining activities for safe LTO.” The mission had already made several recommendations and suggestions to Eskom. These included – the utility should thoroughly review and execute all programmes at the NPP which were relevant for its LTO; finish the revalidation process for the qualification of cables in the NPP containment area for the period of the LTO; and, to make certain that the containment structure monitoring system was kept fully functional. The IAEA team also identified good practices and performances at Koeberg, which would be shared across the global nuclear industry. The NPP staff had “[i]ntegrated a corrective action programme to extensively consider operating experience for long term operation”. They had also employed a template for the collection of vitally important information from electrical component original equipment manufacturers, to establish the extended qualified life of these parts. And the attitude, health and other attributes of Koeberg staff had been characterised by means of a ‘capability index’, to evaluate their fitness to perform tasks. “We appreciate the IAEA support in plant ageing management and preparation for safe LTO,” stated Eskom chief nuclear officer Riedewaan Bakardien. “The LTO of Koeberg NPP up to 2045 is a vital part of Eskom’s energy planning strategy. The results of this mission will help us finalise our activities for safe LTO in alignment with IAEA Safety Standards.”