Security services company G4S has called on Police Minister Bheki Cele to convene an urgent meeting with all stakeholders to address the continuing escalation of violence in cash-in-transit (CIT) attacks, following the death of a G4S CIT employee and the serious injury of another during a CIT attack on April 25. During a cross-pavement CIT attack in Durban at about 13:30 on April 25, four perpetrators opened fire on three G4S officers, resulting in one sustaining fatal injuries and another sustaining serious injury before being airlifted to a nearby private hospital where he remains in critical condition, the company says. “These are not ordinary criminals. They are well-organised, cold-blooded murderers whose indiscriminate use of weapons continue to take lives and destroy families. The country and the entire private security industry cannot afford to lose more guards to these brutal attacks and we are, therefore, calling on the Police Minister to take urgent action,” says G4S Southern Africa regional cluster director Renso Smit. “To tackle CIT attacks, we believe it is essential that this sort of crime is prioritised; that the CIT task team under the South African Police Service (SAPS) be reconstituted and bolstered as a matter of urgency; and that the sector works closely with law enforcement and government to tackle this scourge together. “There are not enough prosecutions and convictions to deter these criminals, who are operating with impunity. We are therefore calling on Crime Intelligence, SAPS, the Hawks and the National Prosecuting Authority and the Ministers who lead them, to prioritise CIT crime,” he says. Ensuring the safety of its people and their wellbeing is a priority, and which is especially critical given the nature of their work. G4S invests significantly, and on an ongoing basis, in equipping its guards with all the training, resources, equipment and tactical support they require for protection, says Smit. “We are devastated at this tragic and senseless loss and extend our deepest condolences to the family of the deceased. This loss of life is especially senseless since all of our cross pavement devices are equipped with technology that renders 100% of the cash unusable when forced open, meaning that criminals get away with nothing of value,” he adds.