Toyota South Africa Motors (TSAM) has suspended vehicle production at its Prospecton plant, south of Durban, on the back of heavy rains and flooding in KwaZulu-Natal. A spokesperson for TSAM says the plant “incurred some flooding in areas”, with operations halted since Monday evening. “Efforts geared towards a safe start-up, after the water has been cleared, are in place.” TSAM produces the Corolla Cross, Fortuner, Hiace Ses’fikile minibus and Hilux bakkie for the local market, while some models are also exported. The Prospecton operations also hosted the Hino truck assembly plant. Toyota is the sales leader in the local market, and the Hilux the country’s best-selling vehicle. The Motor Industry Staff Association (MISA) noted on Wednesday that was “devastated by the impact” the flooding in Durban and surrounding areas would have on the retail motor industry, which was still battling to recover from the Covid-19 pandemic. MISA operations CEO Martlé Keyter said the organisation would donate R90 700 to the Gift of the Givers Foundation, which was busy providing blankets and warm meals to displaced communities. President Cyril Ramaphosa visited the province on Wednesday. DURBAN PORT GRADUALLY RESUMES OPERATIONS Transnet gradually resumed operations at the Port of Durban early on Wednesday morning, following a suspension of service across the port’s terminals on Monday evening. Operations were halted following flooding in and around the port precinct. The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) said it was working with Transnet, the KwaZulu-Natal provincial government, eThekwini municipality and Eskom to stabilise operations at the harbour. Priority interventions include repairing Bayhead road, which is the main access route to the container terminals at the port and Island View, and investigating alternative access roads into the port while Bayhead road is under construction. The DPE said the cargo that would be prioritised for evacuation from the port on Wednesday included food, medical supplies and petroleum products. Shipping, which was suspended as a result of extensive debris caused by the adverse weather, is expected to resume once it has been established that it is safe to do so. Transnet National Ports Authority, using its helicopters, noted that it had rescued 80 people trapped in various flooded areas around eThekwini on Tuesday. It also reported that there had been no damage to the pipeline infrastructure, and that Transnet Pipelines would continue to supply fuel that was already in the system into the inland market. Transnet Freight Rail said it was assessing the rail network in Durban and surrounding areas to determine the extent of damage before resuming train services into and out of the port. The North Coast, South Coast and main lines from Durban to Pietermaritzburg remain closed. In Richards Bay, operations are not suspended, but the terminals are operating less efficiently, with challenges experienced in handling wet cargo. TRUCKS BACKING UP ON N3 Transnet said on Tuesday that it had requested customers to refrain from sending trucks to the Port of Durban. A number of trucks were, however, already on their way to the harbour, prior to news of the flooding breaking. Road Freight Association CEO Gavin Kelly on Wednesday reported that there were “already long queues of trucks along the N3”. “The Marianhill plaza has a backlog of 10 km all the way to Hammarsdale.” Kelly said it appeared as if this queue had now afforded criminals the opportunity to loot the trucks. “Access roads around the Port of Durban have been damaged. Container yards, truck depots and trucks themselves have been flooded and damaged. The area is really a disaster at the moment,” he added. Kelly said the flooding would cause delivery disruptions in the flow of imported goods. However, he did not foresee any shortages in foodstuffs and fuel. “The association has advised members to delay any departures towards Durban, and to find depots and safe parking areas along the way. Where possible, members have been requested to assist one another to get any vehicles off the road and into secure holding areas until the logistics chain is up and running again.