State-owned logistics group Transnet suspended operations across its Durban Terminals sites from 19.30 on April 11 following disruptive weather conditions in KwaZulu-Natal this week that damaged road infrastructure leading to the Port of Durban and impacting access to harbour terminals. Rail lines in certain parts of the province are operating at limited capacity as a result of flooding, while Transnet Freight Rail’s engineering teams assess the extent of the damage. Transnet says the operational suspension of activities at the Port of Durban is only for safety reasons, with no major incidents reported. Besides road access, shipping has also been suspended until further notice as a result of environmental damage caused by the adverse weather, with berthed vessels on standby. Going forward, a multidisciplinary command centre – comprising the Transnet National Ports Authority, operators and customers – has been established to monitor port activities. As such, Transnet recommends ports customers postpone taking trucks into the port to avoid congestion. Meanwhile, in Richards Bay, Transnet’s port terminals are operating at limited capacity, with challenges experienced in handling wet cargo. ROADS The South African National Roads Agency Limited (Sanral) confirmed the closure of road access to the Port of Durban while its engineers conduct integrity inspections. “Bayhead road, which provides access to the port, is completely closed due to heavy rains and flooding,” says Sanral eastern region design and construction manager Ravi Ronny. He adds that engineers are on the ground providing guidance on mobility around the network. In addition, some sections of the N3 freeway are partially closed as a result of upgrades, with floods exacerbating the situation. “We appeal to all motorists and especially freight transport not to leave their destinations to try and come to [the Port of Durban]. There is no access to the port. We are working with emergency services to get the road network reopened,” says Ronny.