The recent resignation of National Nuclear Regulator (NNR) CEO Dr Mzubanzi Bismark Tyobeka has stimulated reaction from a number of South African civil society organisations. Tyobeka’s resignation was announced by the NNR Board on March 18. The reason given for his resignation was, in the words of the Board’s statement, “to pursue his profession elsewhere”. Tyobeka had headed the NNR since September 2013, or for about eight-and-a-half years. “The Board would like to take this opportunity to appreciate the commitment and invaluable contribution made by Dr Tyobeka during his tenure, and wishes him all the best in his future endeavours,” it said. Both the Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa), the South African Faith Communities’ Environment Institute (Safcei) and the Federation for a Sustainable Environment on Thursday expressed concern over Tyobeka’s departure. They also called for greater transparency from the NNR. “For a skilled ambitious professional, it is not a surprising move. Dr Tyobeka was a person who stood up and demanded sufficient budget to ensure nuclear safety,” pointed out Outa parliamentary adviser Liz McDaid. “But as we have seen, over the years, with the exposure and setting aside of the nuclear deal, and with only an ageing plant at Koeberg to oversee, professionals need to make career choices.” “The resignation of Dr Tyobeka is the latest loss in a series of highly skilled nuclear expertise from the [NNR] and Koeberg nuclear power plant,” said Safcei executive director Francesca de Gasparis. “Losing someone of Dr Tyobeka’s experience and skillset in South Africa and internationally, at this time, raises questions about whether nuclear energy and Koeberg are being well regulated, whether safety is being put first.” The NNR was facing a legal battle with Outa because it had refused to release information requested under the Promotion of Access to Information Act. (There was also a separate looming court case, which did not directly involve the NNR, regarding the Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy’s dismissal of the NNR’s civil society representative.) “We again ask for Eskom and the NNR to be more transparent in their planning and for us to be included in the big decisions within these public entities,” stated De Gasparis. “It’s extremely important that the public is not kept in the dark so that we are brought into the confidence [sic] and understand exactly the implications of the loss of highly skilled professionals like Dr Tyobeka, as well as the ongoing safety issues at Koeberg and the big question mark over the life extension of Koeberg.” “The NNR experiences huge capacity restraints and does not possess the funding, nor the human resources, necessary to conduct proper planning, coordination and monitoring activities and remediation plans can only be implemented when finances are available,” affirmed Federation for a Sustainable Environment CEO Mariette Liefferink. “[S]takeholders have voiced complaints regarding the lack of responsiveness and transparency in respect of data on radioactivity in certain areas. It is important for communities to have access to information that can be used to protect or realise their rights.” “Eskom has admitted it has lost skilled personnel at Koeberg,” highlighted McDaid. “Sadly, even with the decline of the nuclear industry, the legacy of nuclear waste remains. And South Africa needs a strong regulatory body to keep the public safe. Who will now head the NNR and will the government provide sufficient funds to ensure effective regulation?”