The South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (Necsa) and the Chemical Industries Education and Training Authority (Chieta) have signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU), to facilitate cooperation between the two entities in skills development programmes. Skills development is a very important role for Necsa and a fundamental role for Chieta. The MoU was signed on Thursday (but not announced until Friday) and came into effect immediately after signature by both parties. It will run for four years (until March 2026) but is renewable. (The Necsa group includes a speciality fluorine chemicals subsidiary, Pelchem.) The MoU has four main focus areas. They are – issues of transformation, including the inclusion of women in leadership and management positions; implementing relevant skills development programmes; developing a ‘School of Specialisation’; and starting the development of skills for Necsa’s multipurpose reactor project. “We know that relevant skills development has a positive impact on the economy and subsequently on the unemployment rate,” highlighted Chieta CEO Yershen Pillay. “We are looking forward to working with Necsa, which has a close-on 60-year history of efficiently operating the SAFARI-1 research reactor. We believe this MoU will not only contribute to the pool of employable and skilled people in the country, but more specifically it will make a difference to much-needed scarce skills in technology and other STEM (science, technology, engineering, maths) sectors.” “As Necsa we are delighted to be part of the initiative that aims to contribute to the economic growth of our country through skills development,” affirmed Necsa Group CEO Loyiso Tyabashe. “We are looking forward to having all the trainees, especially the unemployed youth at our state-of-the-art Necsa Learning Academy that is accredited by Chieta and other Setas [Sector Education and Training Authorities]. Our programmes will equip the youth with requisite skills for the chemical industry in South Africa and abroad. We also look forward to having these trainees getting jobs and entrepreneurial opportunities in our projects and the broader industry in the future.”