Wits Business School (WBS) has signed an historic agreement with the CT Bauer College of Business at the University of Houston, in the US, which it says opens the door for robust collaboration between their respective energy centres. The African Energy Leadership Centre (AELC) at WBS and The Gutierrez Energy Management Institute (GEMI) at the University of Houston will join forces towards a deeper understanding of the challenges facing the energy sectors in both the US and South Africa and will include a number of initiatives towards a joint goal of developing the next generation of leaders in the energy sector. The partnership is expected to contribute to the body of knowledge in energy leadership in both developed and emerging market economies across the globe, as well as enhance the international experience of both students and faculty through instruction, collaborative research and exchange programmes. The AELC was formed in 2017 to address the issues of energy shortages in Africa, as well as the skills deficit in the industry. It offers the first postgraduate energy leadership programmes in Africa – a PhD, a Master of Management and Postgraduate Diploma in African Energy Leadership. The centre also undertakes research in energy, provides thought leadership, develops partnerships and is a centre for dialogue on critical energy issues on the African continent and beyond. The GEMI is responsible for the energy programme at Bauer, focusing on developing and placing future leaders with relevant knowledge and experience of the industry. Through the GEMI, Bauer offers energy-focused degrees, certificates and courses, as well experiential learning projects for undergraduate and graduate students. The GEMI also conducts energy business research and industry events. “We are very excited to be collaborating with the Bauer College of Business in an area so critical to our sustainable future. This cross-continental agreement is of great significance to the AELC and to Wits University as a whole as we strive towards positive change in Africa and globally. “We are looking forward to a long and fruitful relationship,” says WBS AELC director Professor Lwazi Ngubevana. The partnership agreement launched with the first of a series of virtual panel discussions co-hosted by the AELC and the GEMI in February, with further webinars to take place during the year.