Tyre manufacturer and mobility company Michelin Tyre Company South Africa has attained Level 1 broad-based black economic empowerment (BBBEE) certification, which is the result of its four-year transformation journey started by executing a new people, profit and planet strategy in South Africa, which is aligned with the Michelin Group’s global vision. Michelin’s commitment to BBBEE is aligned to its purpose of giving people a better way forward. This is why the company made a concerted effort to focus on all the pillars of the BBBEE Codes of Good Practice, including recently concluding an ownership transaction. BBBEE also contributed towards Michelin’s continued focus on diversity in all its forms. One such example is the growth of women in management, in addition to creating opportunities in an inclusive environment, where women can reach their full potential. “We see ourselves as an integral part of every community in which we operate and we want to play a significant role in growing and developing these communities. When we set out on our transformation journey, we wanted to ensure that we focused on aspects that would make a tangible difference to our stakeholders,” says Michelin South Africa MD Marcus Baffoe-Bonnie. However, Michelin would not have been able to achieve this milestone on its own. Through its valued partnership with several external training solution providers, the company has also been able to create a robust skills development package that offers a combination of learning options for the benefit of its employees and external beneficiaries. “Another strategic focus at Michelin is employee development. For us to be sustainable and maintain our position as a world leader in sustainable mobility, we must continue to create opportunities to develop talent, skills and diversity. “Through training and mentorship, Michelin invests in growing our employee skills and expertise while helping other stakeholders in our network to do the same within their organisations,” adds Michelin South Africa chief administrative officer Nokonwaba Ngxabazi. Further, BBBEE allows Michelin to create opportunities for deserving beneficiaries to become active members of the economy, including its customer base, which will also benefit from Michelin being certified Level 1. “At Michelin, we are committed to uplifting, supporting and investing in people through real action. We are proud of our efforts that empower our customers, employees, their families and the communities in which we operate,” says Baffoe-Bonnie.