Architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) technology multinational RIB has partnered with nonprofit organisation Building Transparency, which developed and provides a free and open-access tool targeted at reducing the impact of embodied carbon and making the AEC industry more efficient and sustainable. Building Transparency’s technology solution is its Embodied Carbon in Construction Calculator (EC3). This tool houses a database of digital, third-party verified environmental product declarations (EPDs), which can be used to perform sustainability benchmarking and assessments. Through the sponsorship of various entities, such as RIB, Building Transparency’s EC3 tool remains free to use, RIB says. “This is particularly useful to construction material procurers, developers, contractors and policymakers alike. By being able to measure the amount of embodied carbon within production materials, these stakeholders are empowered to evaluate a project’s overall carbon emissions and use that information to procure low-carbon material alternatives or, in the case of regulators, set embodied carbon limits. “Such measures will ensure the industry’s compliance and adherence to environmental, social and governance sustainable building practices,” RIB says. “There is a need to actionably and urgently reduce the carbon footprint of the AEC industry. Integrating technology such as EC3 into the workings of the sector provides critical decision-makers with the tools and data needed to effectively evaluate and understand the true carbon footprint associated with their projects. “Armed with this, they will be able to chart tangible targets and collectively help minimise the industry’s impact on the environment. We all have a role to play in building a more sustainable world,” says Building Transparency executive director Stacy Smedley. Statistics paint an unflattering picture of the AEC industry’s impact on the environment. Research indicates that an estimated 38% of global energy consumption can be attributed to building and construction activities, while the processing of materials, such as concrete, is believed to contribute to as much as 6% of global carbon dioxide emissions. The high amounts of material waste that occur within the industry along with the need to rework construction structures adds to the inefficiencies, RIB highlights. “Working in a sustainable manner is critical to the future prosperity of the world. The continued disregard for the negative and potentially disastrous effects of greenhouse-gas emissions, pollutants and other environmentally unsafe practices must be addressed,” RIB says. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report revealed that we are at a code red for humanity. Our collective efforts should be geared towards choosing a path of action that avoids a climate catastrophe, the company notes. “RIB’s partnership with Building Transparency aligns closely with the purpose of enabling our customers to build in an environmentally and socially responsible manner. “We cannot shy away from the fact that the long-term growth of the AEC industry is closely tied to sustainable practices. Transforming the way the sector plans, builds and operates buildings is our primary purpose,” says RIB chief revenue officer Andrew Skudder.