Information technology (IT) systems integrator and service provider Datacentrix has, as part of ongoing efforts to enable economic development, joined its long-term business partner IT devices and services company Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE) in supporting the new Greater Alexandra Chamber of Commerce (GALXCOC) Digital Hub and Township Incubator. The township incubator is based at Motswedi Skills Centre and will foster the growth and development of small businesses and the Alexandra economy. Datacentrix provided information and communications technology network infrastructure installation services and expertise for the Digital Hub and Township Incubator. In addition to the infrastructure support provided to this facility, Datacentrix will also support the new hub with linkage opportunities through its supplier development and learnership programmes, says Datacentrix public sector sales GM Billy Mabena. “The Fourth Industrial Revolution presents a plethora of digital opportunities across all industries. “Broad economic growth and small business development are two areas that are highly dependent on an efficient, integrated and connected network of support platforms, such as these digital hubs and incubators,” he says. The initiative will specifically target youth unemployment by assisting young entrepreneurs to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the digital era. The hub was launched in early March by Small Business Development Minister Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams and is backed by the Small Enterprise Development Agency, Ecosystem Development for Small Enterprise Programme and the Delegation of the European Union to South Africa. “This is an opportunity for the communities to accelerate their digital programmes and contribute towards the revival of the economy through technology,” says Mabena. However, for the programme to succeed, it requires public-private partnerships that will provide small innovative digital startups with much-needed business infrastructure, enterprise supplier development linkages, access to funding and investor linkages. “As a local business, Datacentrix has a vested interest in the economic development of the country. In simple terms, when the South African economy does well, especially through digital programmes, we do well too. Digital entrepreneurship is an effective way to enable economic development and job creation,” he adds. The main objective of the Datacentrix supplier development programme is to build sustainable exempted microenterprises and qualifying small enterprises that will contribute to job creation and economic growth, by providing financial and non-financial support aligned with the National Development Plan and broad-based black economic empowerment Codes of Good Practice. During initial discussions with HPE regarding involvement in this project, it was clear that it resonated well with Datacentrix’s vision of being a good corporate citizen, he adds. Datacentrix has partnered with HPE for the past 25 years and the companies share the same vision relating to business drivers and social cohesion, particularly when it comes to human development and philanthropic initiatives, Mabena says. “This aligns with the objectives of the GALXCOC Digital Hub and Incubator, and it is for this reason that we took up the challenge to partner on this project. “It is encouraging to see that, despite the many challenges faced by South Africans, including crime and unemployment, and being put under more pressure during the pandemic, we have also witnessed a rapid increase in digital adoption across all sectors of the economy and country, and even in our private lives. “Datacentrix’s transformational projects are initiatives that meaningfully contribute to our transformational objectives, in particular supporting our previously disadvantaged youth,” Mabena says.