Logistics companies Imperial and UbiPharm have joined forces to create an expansive healthcare distribution network across Africa. This strategic alliance is aimed at providing complementary continental route-to-market solutions to healthcare principals and clients, enabling both companies to leverage each other’s operations and commercial services. While Imperial and UbiPharm will each maintain their individual business autonomies, the strategic alliance is intended to provide better access to medicines, vaccines and other healthcare products for patients and consumers in 40 out of 54 recognised African countries – thereby becoming one of the most expansive networks for healthcare distribution in Africa. All the activities essential to the availability of medicines – including manufacturing, regulatory, promotion and distribution – will be readily available to healthcare principals through this network. “As part of our purpose to connect Africa and the world and improve people’s lives, Imperial seeks to connect every African patient to quality healthcare, every day,” Imperial group CEO Mohammed Akoojee said in a statement on January 24, adding that the strategic alliance with UbiPharm was in line with fulfilling this ambition. He noted that the alliance reflected Imperial’s ‘Gateway to Africa’ strategy, which was also focused on expanding Imperial’s geographic footprint and reach throughout Africa – including in Anglophone, Francophone and Lusophone African countries. “A pan-African solution such as this one bodes well for our principals, clients and customers and, more importantly, enhances healthcare through increased patient access to vital medicines that are critical for sustainable development of the African continent,” Akoojee said. The alliance between Imperial and UbiPharm also aims to meet the growing demand from the healthcare industry for a global, secure and efficient continental solution in various African countries, in compliance with good distribution practices. "Our alliance with Imperial is aligned with our strategy, which is to continuously innovate in order to meet the changing needs of populations. This alliance will make it possible to strengthen access to health solutions on the African continent," added UbiPharm group CEO Gérard Mangoua. The synergies provided through this strategic alliance have presented Imperial and UbiPharm’s combined client base with a unique and unprecedented offering in terms of development, consolidation and access to new markets and territories.