North West Cooperative Governance, Human Settlements and Traditional Affairs MEC Lenah Miga will lead a committee, established by North West Premier Bushy Maape, to develop a response plan to deal with the disaster brought on by the recent floods across the province. Miga made the announcement in Lekwa-Teemane during her visit to the area to assess the situation at the Bloemhof dam, after residents had been warned early this week to evacuate the area in the wake of heavy rains. The committee will comprise of the MECs for Public Works and Roads, Education, Social Development, Health, Community Transport and Safety Management and Finance, as well as mayors from the Bojanala Platinum, Dr Ruth Segomotsi Mompati and Ngaka Modiri Molema district municipalities. The Bloemhof dam is currently filled to capacity and the sluice gates have been opened. The recent torrential rains have already affected about 702 households throughout the province to date. This number is, however, likely to change as the country is expected to receive more rain. Miga lauded the Lekwa-Teemane municipality for assisting the residents staying along the Bloemhof dam to evacuate their business premises and private homes. “The disaster management team in the Dr Ruth Segomotsi Mompati district municipality is on high alert for any eventuality, and is working with sector departments in the district to assist where necessary," she added. She further noted that 13 local municipalities were affected by the disaster brought on by recent storms in the province and that the severe weather conditions had led to damage to property and environmental degradation, including the emergence of potholes on many road. “The provincial roads situation has taken a turn for the worse. In Kraaipan, in Ratlou local municipality, the Moseje bridge near the railway station in the area was washed away, while the R375 road bridge near Mareetsane was also destroyed by the recent heavy rains. "The Goedgevonden road has been flooded, the Mooipan area road on the N18 between the Ratlou and Naledi local municipalities is flooded and, in Delareyville, another bridge was washed away,” the MEC said.