The representative body of the global airline industry, the International Air Transport Association (Iata), has called on governments to more rapidly ease the restrictions they imposed on travel, to try and counter the Covid-19 pandemic. This was because the disease was moving from pandemic to endemic status. “With experience of the Omicron variant, there is mounting scientific evidence and opinion opposing the targeting of travellers with restrictions and country bans to control the spread of Covid-19,” highlighted Iata director-general Willie Walsh. “The measures have not worked. Today Omicron is present in all parts of the world. That’s why travel, with very few exceptions, does not increase the risk to general populations. The billions spent testing travellers would be far more effective if allocated to vaccine distribution or strengthening health care systems.” The association pointed out that the World Health Organisation (WHO) had last week confirmed its recommendation that international travel bans be lifted or eased because they did not, in WHO’s words, “provide added value and continue to contribute to the economic and social stress experienced by States”. WHO pointed out that travel restrictions imposed after the discovery of Omicron had failed to stop the worldwide spread of this variant of Covid-19. Iata also cited a recent study conducted in the UK. This had ascertained that, had the country’s additional measures against Omicron been in force from the start of November (which was before the variant was identified), the effect would have been to delay the peak of the wave of Omicron infections by only five days and reduce the number of cases by only 3%. If there had been no testing requirements for travellers, the Omicron wave would have reached its zenith only seven days earlier than it did, and the number of cases would only have been 8% higher. And with the complete establishment of Omicron in the UK, the abolition of all travel testing would have no effect on the numbers of Omicron cases or hospitalisations in the country. “While the study is specific to the UK, it is clear that travel restrictions in any part of the world have had little impact on the spread of Covid-19, including the Omicron variant,” affirmed Walsh. “The UK, France and Switzerland have recognised this and are among the first to begin removing travel measures. More governments need to follow their lead. Accelerating the removal of travel restrictions will be a major step towards living with the virus.” There were four major steps governments should take, urged Iata. All travel barriers for people fully vaccinated with WHO-approved vaccines should be lifted. This would include requirements for testing and quarantine. Quarantine-free travel should be allowed for unvaccinated people with negative pre-flight antigen test results. Travel bans should be lifted. And the easing of travel restrictions should be accelerated, because travellers posed no greater risk than the general population did, regarding the spread of Covid-19.