Peugeot’s e-Expert Hydrogen fuel-cell van has entered production. With this, the French vehicle maker says it has become “one of the very first manufacturers to offer, in addition to its combustion and battery-electric versions, a hydrogen fuel-cell powered version in the commercial vehicle segment”. “With the e-Expert Hydrogen, Peugeot is taking the lead in a future zero-emission technology that is particularly relevant to the light-commercial vehicle market,” says Peugeot brand CEO Linda Jackson. “Hydrogen electric technology allows intensive daily use without the need for recharging, a decisive advantage for professionals who, in a single day, have to cover several hundred kilometres on the motorway and then enter emission-restricted urban areas.” Deliveries of the e-Expert Hydrogen have already started. The first customer was Watea, the young subsidiary dedicated to green mobility solutions in the Michelin group. The e-Expert Hydrogen’s launch comes 15 months after the introduction of the battery-powered e-Expert model in 2020, which was named International Van of the Year in early 2021. The e-Expert Hydrogen is based on the battery-powered e-Expert. It is built in Germany, at Rüsselsheim, on the production lines of the Stellantis competence centre dedicated to hydrogen technology. The van sees the integration of the mid-power plug-in hydrogen fuel-cell electric system in its engine compartment and underbody. “The result? No compromise in terms of load volume, and a low centre of gravity ­– a guarantee of stability, safety and agility,” notes the auto maker. The e-Expert Hydrogen’s power system consists of a fuel cell producing the electricity needed to propel the vehicle thanks to the hydrogen on board the tank, and a high-voltage lithium-ion rechargeable battery with a capacity of 10.5 kWh, which can be recharged from the electricity grid and which also powers the electric engine in certain driving phases. The vehicle can be filled with hydrogen in three minutes for a more than 400 km range, and also has a charging socket for the high-voltage battery. The van, which comes in a standard and long version, has the same loading volume as the diesel and battery electric versions. Maximum speed is 130 km/h. “Hydrogen is now becoming a major pillar of the energy transition with the announcement of different international projects,” notes Peugeot. “In Europe in particular, the ecosystem is growing and the European Clean Hydrogen Alliance is investing an estimated €60-billion to promote this solution. “Thanks to government plans, the number of hydrogen stations in Europe is constantly increasing.”