Integrated satellite and terrestrial network operator Intelsat and satellite services multinational Thales Alenia Space have signed an agreement to build two software-defined satellites that have been designed to advance Intelsat’s global fabric of software-defined geosynchronous equatorial orbit connectivity as part of its fifth-generation (5G) software-defined network (SDN). “The addition of the Thales Alenia Space software-defined satellites represents an essential advancement in Intelsat’s 5G SDN, designed to enable greater agility, flexibility and orchestration across edge, satellite and core. Intelsat’s standards-based, open-architecture network design facilitates the incorporation of the best technology at any given time, further bolstering network resiliency,” says Intelsat CEO Stephen Spengler. The contract enables the continued advancement of Intelsat’s planned global software-defined satellite-based network, adding high-speed dynamically-allocated connectivity across Africa, Europe, the Middle East and Asia for commercial and government mobility services and cellular backhaul. “Our relationship with Intelsat has been so meaningful, knowing that our attractive Space Inspire software-defined solution will contribute to the realisation of Intelsat’s global 5G software-defined unified network. We are proud that our advanced satellite technology will play a significant role in Intelsat’s vision to reimagine the global telecoms ecosystem,” says Thales Alenia Space CEO Hervé Derrey. “Named Intelsat 41 (IS-41) and Intelsat 44 (IS-44), the two next-generation software-defined satellites are scheduled to be in service in 2025. They will join two Airbus constructed software-defined satellites, Intelsat 42 (IS-42) and Intelsat 43 (IS-43),” Intelsat says. Intelsat 41 and Intelsat 44 will be based on Thales Alenia Space’s innovative Space Inspire product line, enabling seamless telecommunications, mission and services reconfiguration, instant in-orbit adjustment to broadband connectivity demand and superior video broadcasting performance, while maximising the effective use of the satellite resources. “With the addition of Intelsat 41 and Intelsat 44, in partnership with Thales Alenia Space, Intelsat will blanket the earth with software-defined satellites, progressing the world’s first global 5G SDN, designed to unify the global telecoms ecosystem,” says Spengler.