The uYilo Electric Mobility Programme has opened the Kickstart Fund 2022 for submissions. uYilo was established in 2013 as a multistakeholder, collaborative programme focused on enabling, facilitating and mobilising electromobility (e-mobility) in South Africa. uYilo is an initiative of the Technology Innovation Agency, a public entity of government’s Department of Science and Innovation. The Kickstart Fund provides up to R1-million to selected projects in electromobility focus areas such as energy storage, vehicle systems, charging infrastructure and the connected car. Previously funded projects included the development of battery systems, charging solutions, motors, inverters, remote monitoring systems and electric vehicles. uYilo says the 2022 project submissions that are accepted will be required to achieve a set of milestones throughout the project development process. “The development of a local e-mobility value-chain is the key outcome of the uYilo Kickstart funding initiative,” says uYilo director Hiten Parmar. “The Kickstart Fund focuses on accelerating existing research and development to the level where [projects and products] can be commercialised into the market. “It provides the support for local products, services and skillsets so South Africa can use its own resources to build an electric vehicle industry, with expanding opportunities for export while creating local employment.”

International market changes in the acceptance of internal combustion engines (ICEs), have placed the spotlight on South Africa’s need to evolve to the electric mobility, adds Parmar. Internationally ICE technology has a decade left before being replaced by a variety of solutions within the e-mobility ecosystem, he notes. “After that time, South Africa will have to be an exporter of e-mobility solutions, with the associated local workforce and job opportunities, or it will have to rely on imports, with little of the local automotive industry left. “We need to become part of the future. We have the opportunity to become a leader in e-mobility in Africa. “The uYilo Kickstart Fund is part of helping local companies realise the future and become globally competitive with local innovation.” Kickstart Fund project applications must be completed and submitted to info@uYilo.org.za before the deadline at midday on January 31. The full list of past Kickstart projects is available on the uYilo website at www.uyilo.org.za/kick-start-fund/, as is all the supporting documentation to be submitted with each proposal.  