Financial services firm Rand Merchant Bank (RMB) has been announced as the headline sponsor for solar power and energy storage industry event Solar Power Africa, which will be held at the Cape Town International Convention Centre from February 16 to 18, industry body South African Photovoltaic Industry Association (SAPVIA) said. Organised by events firm Messe Frankfurt in partnership with SAPVIA, Solar Power Africa is a three-day event and attendees will benefit from direct access to expert insights and solutions to a range of challenges, as well as key trends and developments in the renewable energy market. RMB prides itself on strategic sponsorships that reinforce their value proposition and allow them to move beyond the scope of banking to benefit the individuals and communities in which they operate. “RMB is committed to enabling the future of renewable energy. We have a deep understanding of the sector and have become a trusted partner, delivering innovative funding solutions for renewable energy projects across Africa,” says RMB infrastructure sector solutions head of power and renewables Daniel Zinman. South Africa has the potential to take the lead in Africa’s transition to a green economy. The development of solar power projects will enable the country to meet its climate commitments as well as ensure security of supply for both domestic and commercial electricity users. “We are delighted to have the support of RMB for the forthcoming Solar Power Africa event. The roster of speakers and exhibitors is testament to the strength of the sector, which is only set to grow as investors seek to make more sustainable investments,” says Messe Frankfurt South Africa Group exhibitions director Joshua Low. “We are looking forward to supporting industry, financiers and government capitalise on this dynamic sector.” The Solar Power Africa event is presented in partnership with one of the largest solar power and related industry shows in the world, namely Solar Power Events, which is an organiser for energy events throughout North America.