The Africa Energy Indaba (AEI), to be held on March 1 and 2, will showcase South Africa’s renewable energy competencies and present these as a model for the rest of Africa. This will be in partnership with South African Electrotechnical Export Council (SAEEC), which has been a long-term strategic partner of the AEI. The respective strengths of both entities will create “compelling value for those with an interest in Africa’s evolving energy sector”, the AEI organisers note in a statement. SAEEC’s member companies provide a range of electricity infrastructure products and services across Africa and are highly regarded solution providers for power and telecommunications infrastructure projects across the continent. “SAEEC has long been an advocate of Africa looking within itself to develop solutions for African challenges and it is my hope that the thought leaders and decision-makers from the various African energy agencies and utilities will deliberate on issues, challenges and accomplishments in Africa’s energy sector. “As Africans, the response we present to resolve Africa’s energy deficit must always reflect the underlying socioeconomic developmental impact of energy access and the need for reliable and sustainable energy generation to allow for accelerated industrial and economic growth,” says SAEEC CEO Chiboni Evans. She adds that the summit will showcase small, medium-sized and microenterprises active in the wind and solar energy sectors. The summit will facilitate discussions around the energy transition and engage African energy sector leaders with conversation around solutions for the future. “AEI 2022 presents a unique and interactive networking experience in which international energy stakeholders can assemble and participate in the continent’s transformation. “The conference will transpire with the steadfast support from prominent African and global industry leaders and will, ultimately, be geared towards expanding opportunities across Africa,” the organisers state.