Global pharmaceuticals and life sciences company Bayer has launched a new programme called Testing4Ag, which allows research scientists from around the world to submit novel chemistries to Bayer for testing in the hopes of identifying potential new modes of action to control fungal diseases, insect pests or weeds. Testing4Ag, a part of Bayer’s Open4Ag partnership development and innovation approach, seeks to develop the newest generation of crop protection products that safely and sustainably address the changing needs of producers. “Bayer is a leader in agricultural research and development and we are committed to driving the future of agriculture by delivering innovative and sustainable solutions to the problems facing farmers both today and tomorrow,” says Bayer crop science division research and development head Bob Reiter. The programme combines the transformative ideas of pioneering researchers with Bayer’s knowledge, experts and resources without taking ownership of the intellectual property (IP) that participants contribute. It will help scientists learn more about their own compounds through testing and transparent results. The submitted compounds will be assessed through high-end biological testing against a variety of plant pathogens, weed species, insect and nematode pests and/or vectors. Test results will be shared back directly with participants, who can freely use them in continued research. In a further commitment to open innovation, researchers and their institutions will retain all rights to the potential IP generated through the Testing4Ag programme. “Developing crop protection products that help farmers feed the world in the face of climate change, while further reducing the environmental impact of agriculture, is an ambitious goal. “Individual researchers, universities, even small startups can help add to our understanding of solutions to the most important problems facing agriculture right now. We welcome them to participate in Testing4Ag,” says Bayer crop science division small molecules head Rachel Rama.