US-based global major aerospace and defence group Lockheed Martin has been awarded a $102-million contract to upgrade 25 of the Egyptian Air Force’s (EAF’s) Boeing AH-64D Apache attack helicopters to the latest AH-64E standard. Lockheed Martin will supply latest generation sensors which will be integrated on to the aircraft as part of a remanufacturing process that will take place at Boeing’s Apache Helicopter Plant (at Mesa in the US state of Arizona). Although the contract is to upgrade EAF helicopters, the contracting authority is actually the US Army. The upgrade programme forms part of an ‘indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity’ (ID/IQ) contract. An ID/IQ contract is a form of a contract used by the US Federal government to acquire products and services when the government agency concerned is not certain how many services and products it will end up acquiring. Under such circumstances, ID/IQ contracts, which have fixed time periods, streamline the acquisition process. The main systems to be provided by Lockheed Martin are the Generation III (Gen III) Target Acquisition Designation Sight/Pilot Night Vision Sensor (TADS/PNVS) and the Gen III Day Sensor Assembly (DSA). These will be delivered to the Mesa plant in kit form. The upgrade programme is expected to be completed by July 2024. The GEN III TADS/PNVS functions during the day, night and in bad weather. It provides the pilot with long-range precision piloting and engagement capabilities. The Gen III DSA augments the target designation and ranging capabilities of the Gen III TADS/PNVS, so that the helicopter can make full use of current and future weapons. “Lockheed Martin is committed to a strong and sustained partnership with our customers in the United States and around the world,” affirmed Lockheed Martin Missiles and Fire Control Rotary Wing Sensors programme director Tom Eldredge. “This contract enables us to respond rapidly to Egypt’s emerging defence needs, including requirements for new sensor systems and upgrades.” Reportedly, the EAF currently operates a fleet of 46 Apaches, most of them being AH-64D models, but with some AH-64Es. (In late 2018, Washington approved the sale of ten new-build AH-64Es to Egypt.)