Two years since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, global leaders are set to convene for the World Economic Forum’s (WEF’s) Davos Agenda 2022, from January 17 to 21, providing a platform for them to reflect on the state of the world and shape solutions for challenges in the year ahead. Radically different pandemic experiences have exacerbated global divisions. Vaccine inequities, combined with new strains, have also slowed international economic recovery. However, according to the WEF’s ‘Global Risks Report 2022’, Covid-19 is only one of the critical global challenges which may become unmanageable unless world leaders prioritise proactive collaboration. Therefore, the Davos Agenda 2022 will focus on driving concerted action among key global stakeholders. “Everyone hopes that in 2022 the Covid-19 pandemic, and the crises that accompanied it, will finally begin to recede. But major global challenges await us, from climate change to rebuilding trust and social cohesion. “To address them, leaders will need to adopt new models, look long term, renew cooperation and act systemically. The Davos Agenda 2022 is the starting point for the dialogue needed for global cooperation,” says WEF founder and executive chairperson Klaus Schwab. Through special addresses and panels with leaders of Group of 20 economies and international organisations, the Davos Agenda 2022 aims to provide insights into a range of critical challenges. Participants are set to hear how these leaders will drive action in these and other areas. The Davos Agenda 2022 also aims to mobilise government and business leaders, international organisations and civil society to share their outlook, insights and plans relating to the most urgent global issues such as climate change, social contracts and vaccine equity. These sessions are also meant to provide a platform for a wider connection to enable the global public to engage and be included in the conversation. The Davos Agenda 2022 will also mark the launch of several WEF initiatives aimed at accelerating the race to net-zero emissions, promoting the economic opportunity of nature-positive solutions and advancing cyber-resilience. Other launches, covering a diverse range of topics, will also take place during the course of the event. These include strengthening the resilience of global value chains, building economies in fragile markets through humanitarian investing, bridging the vaccine manufacturing gap and using data solutions to prepare for the next pandemic.