JSE-listed financial services group Alexander Forbes has appointed Ann Leepile as CEO of Alexander Forbes Investments, effective from February 1. “Leepile is ideally placed to lead the next phase of growth for Alexander Forbes Investments, given her deep technical expertise, understanding of the market and leadership track record. She will join the Alexander Forbes Group Executive Committee to ensure that investments continue to play a key role in the execution of the group’s strategy,” the company said on January 10. “Ann’s appointment sharpens our focus to deliver on the immense potential that now exists within Alexander Forbes Investments to grow exponentially into the future as we leverage our transformative investment capabilities, institutional scale and market-leading membership base. "This is an exciting phase for Alexander Forbes Investments and I look forward to the impact that the business will continue to make on the lives of our clients,” said Alexander Forbes CEO Dawie de Villiers. Leepile has previously served as the Alexander Forbes Investments (formerly Investment Solutions) head of global manager research and deputy CIO, which gives her direct insight into the dynamics of the business and its clients. She joined Alexander Forbes after heading Absa Asset Management for six years during which she grew the business to one of the largest asset managers in South Africa. She is a chartered financial accountant charter holder and has attended the Executive Women in Leadership Programme of the Stanford Graduate School of Business. The Alexander Forbes Investments executive team supporting Leepile will consist of CIO Gyongyi King, executive chief economist Isaah Mhlanga, head of investment products Donovan McKay, head of investment operations Maria da Silva and CFO Lisa Stott. Alexander Forbes Investments is the Alexander Forbes Group's primary vehicle to grow and protect the wealth of its clients through its multi-management capability. The investments business turns 25 years old this year and has consistently delivered exceptional performance to clients over this period due to its independence from asset managers, the rigour of its investment process and the expertise of its investment professionals. Alexander Forbes Investments currently is entrusted with more than R420-billion of clients’ savings.