The partnership between chemicals industry education and training authority Chieta and oil refinery the South African Petroleum Refinery (Sapref) is providing skills development programmes in the sector, at an investment value of R6-million by Chieta. Sapref, meanwhile, is providing 160 students a year with bursaries and learnerships. The programme equips them for employment at Sapref or in other companies within the chemical industries sector. The programme includes bursaries for qualifying students studying engineering at a tertiary institution, chemical operations learnerships for national qualifications framework (NQF) levels 1 to 3 and artisan-related learnerships for NQF 2 to 4. “The learnerships open doors for matriculants or for students with a technical and vocational education and training qualification, who have a passion for engineering-related careers and provide the needed competencies for employment in the chemical sector. These learnerships have a duration of one year for each NQF level. “Learnership participants receive monthly stipends, an NQF-aligned qualification based on theoretical classroom training, workshop practical training and workplace training. Learners are assigned to an artisan or process technician in the Sapref process plants, where they gain practical on-the-job training," the organisations said in a January 11 statement. Further, the Chieta and Sapref partnership bursaries support engineering students in chemical, mechanical and electrical degree courses. “Chieta's 2020/21 Integrated Annual Report states that the students who were supported in the year under review underwent structured engineering training at Sapref, thus adding to the talent pool of engineers in the industry. "Learners not only benefitted from the funding, but also gained valuable work experience as they were paired with experienced engineers and took on various projects, gaining vital on-the-job training and practical skills," the organisations noted. Bursary students also receive monthly allowances, a laptop, meal and book allowances, full payment of tuition and residence fees, and work experience during vacations at Sapref. “Chieta has provided valuable assistance in driving many of the learning projects offered by Sapref. This partnership is assisting youth to gain competencies for employment, and it has strengthened my expertise. The chemical industry is a huge contributor to the country’s gross domestic product, offering a powerful engine of innovation and creativity, and adding to economic growth and continued upskilling,” said Sapref learning and development operations manager Thasigan Naidoo. Chieta's ability to meet its mandate is reliant on the collection of skills development levies, and acknowledges the significant contribution that Sapref and other high-paying contributors make to skills development in the sector, added Chieta CEO Yershen Pillay. “Our role is to facilitate skills development and ensure that skills needs are identified and addressed through training initiatives, which are vital for the success and sustainability of key industries. “Partnerships are a strong foundation to Chieta's annual achievements and milestones. With the National Development Plan 2030 as our anchor for excellence, we are proud of how we, together with our stakeholders, are able to deliver successful initiatives that meet the performance indicators and targets of our strategic and annual performance plans,” he said. Chieta collects skills development levies and delivers services back to the industry, including mandatory grants, paid to members to fund their in-house skills development programmes; discretionary grants, allocated towards initiatives that respond to the need for priority skills; and strategic projects aligned to Chieta's goals and relevant educational needs, the training authority said.