Retailer Pick n Pay launched its new vehicle licence disc renewal service nationally on January 25. Customers can now renew their vehicle licence discs in more than 500 Pick n Pay stores across South Africa for R250 – which excludes the added courier fee of R99.99 for delivery to customers. The retailer said it hoped to roll out the service to all Pick n Pay Liquor and Clothing stores soon as well. For comparison, car trading platform Autotrader reported in August 2021 that car licence renewals done through traditional means would cost about R432 in Gauteng, R420 in the Western Cape and R534 in KwaZulu-Natal for average-sized cars. Licences for larger cars, such as sports-utility vehicles, cost R1 416 in Gauteng, R1 314 in the Western Cape and R1 566 in KwaZulu-Natal. “Renewing your car licence disc is now as easy as adding it to your grocery shopping list. Our network of stores across South Africa means that anyone is able to use this convenient service,” said Pick n Pay omnichannel head John Bradshaw in a statement. The new service was officially piloted in 19 Pick n Pay stores for a week before the retailer opened the service up to its other stores following numerous requests from customers who wanted to use the service across the country. The retailer said the new service – which is provided in partnership with incentive programme solutions provider One Loyalty and legal services company Claim Expert – would make it more convenient for customers to renew their licence discs and would also help to reduce congestion at licence renewal offices and at the Post Office. Customers can register online or at a till point, while payment can be done at any participating Pick n Pay store. Customers can expect their new vehicle licence disc to be delivered within ten business days from making the payment. If the vehicle disc had expired prior to renewal, delivery will take slightly longer. The service will also help customers resolve any blockages that may prevent them from renewing their vehicle licence disc. An additional benefit is that, once registered, customers will receive a renewal notification to help them avoid future penalty fees.