The South African Guild of Mobility Journalists (SAGMJ) has announced the 25 finalists for the 2022 South African Car of the Year (COTY) competition. “This year’s COTY finalists show us the tremendous speed of research and development in the automotive industry,” says SAGMJ chairperson Carl Wepener. “The finalists represent the best of the best in South Africa, and we are eager to see who the winners of this year’s competition will be.” Besides the overall winner’s crown, finalists can also win in one of ten categories: Budget, Compact, Compact Family, Midsize, Premium, Luxury, Performance, New Energy, Adventure sports-utility vehicle (SUV) and 4X4 Double Cab. The Budget and Premium categories have no contenders this year. With six vehicles in five different categories, Toyota has the most finalists in this year’s competition. Hyundai is in second place, with five finalists in three different categories. The finalists for the 2022 COTY competition are as follows: Compact: Kia Sonet; Hyundai i20; Peugeot 208; Toyota Urban Cruiser Compact Family: Chery Tiggo 4 Pro; Toyota Corolla Cross; Hyundai Kona Midsize: Hyundai Staria; Hyundai Santa Fe; Mercedes-Benz C-Class; Audi A3; Hyundai Palisade Performance: Toyota GR Yaris; BMW M3 Competition; Volkswagen Golf GTI; BMW 128ti; Porsche 911 Carrera GTS New Energy: Toyota Corolla Cross Hybrid; Lexus IS; Honda Fit Hybrid Adventure SUV: Toyota Land Cruiser 300; Isuzu MU-X 4X4 Double Cab: Peugeot Landtrek; Nissan Navara Luxury: Mercedes-AMG GLE 53 “The COTY committee is extremely pleased with the variety of vehicles that made the finalist round of this year’s competition. Our jury panel of experts has a tough task ahead of them,” says COTY 2022 committee chairperson Graham Eagle. The final round of scoring is set to start shortly and continue until early April. This round includes data used for automated scoring based on segment sales volumes and spec-adjusted competitor pricing. The category winners and overall Car of the Year winner will be announced in May.