Digital skills education facility Forge Academy calls for young Gauteng-based graduates to apply for 20 creative internships to grow their digital skillsets and gain valuable experience in the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) disciplines of software development, user experience design, three-dimensional animation, game design and more. Interns will gain practical industry experience and receive guidance and on-the-job training from qualified and experienced mentors in each field of work. Further, once the internship is complete, interns will receive assistance in seeking full-time employment. “The internship programme, sponsored by Forge Academy, is open to any recent graduate based in Gauteng looking for an opportunity to enter into the 4IR industry. Applications close on January 21. “From applications received, 20 graduates will be chosen for the internship at Forge Academy, falling under Forge Labs, for a 12-month period, starting in February. Each applicant will be paid for their acquired internship position at Forge Academy,” the academy says. Sectors that rely on 4IR skills include economic development, trade and industry, agriculture, infrastructure, labour, science and technology, higher education, basic education, healthcare and communications. “4IR education is the core around which all academic programmes at Forge Academy are built. We need to ensure that our learners are future-fit. These internship opportunities have been designed to empower the next generation of African citizens to be leaders in this revolution,” says Forge Academy CEO Arthur Wade Anderson. The positions available are for 20 interns looking to pursue careers as user experience designers, graphic designers, software developers, two- and three-dimensional animators, game designers, videographers, photographers, sound engineers, podcast producers, copywriters, content strategists, and audio and visual effects editors. Any young adult interested in applying for the Forge Academy internship can do so on the Forge Academy website. Interviews will be conducted by Forge Academy and applicants need to be based in Gauteng, be between the ages of 18 and 30, currently not be employed, be a South African citizen and have a Grade 12 certificate plus a recognised diploma or higher in a relevant field.