International airline intelligence, data and news company ch-aviation has announced that Uganda Airlines has been identified as the operator of the youngest airliner fleet in the world, for the second year in succession. The African carrier’s fleet has an average age of just 1.95 years. “The ch-aviation Youngest Aircraft Fleet Award recognises airlines and aircraft leasing companies worldwide that operate young fleets and manage young portfolios, respectively,” pointed out company CEO Thomas Jaeger. “The efficient newer aircraft generations are vital for lowering CO2 emissions and making flying more environmentally friendly, and we commend the winners for their effort.” In second place was South American operator SKY Airline, with an average aircraft age of 1.99 years. In third place was Asia’s SalamAir, at 2.39 years, followed by another South American operator, Viva, at 2.45 years. Fifth place was also taken by an Asian carrier, flyadeal, at 2.76 years. “It is essential to say that this award is entirely based on non-manipulable fleet data,” he stressed. “There is no jury or any other subjective parameter involved.” However, the Uganda Airlines fleet numbers only six aircraft. Of the top five, SKY has the largest fleet, but that is still only 28 airliners. SalamAir has seven aircraft, Viva 21 and flyadeal 16. Consequently, the awards include a category listing the youngest aircraft fleets of operators with more than 100 aircraft. In this group, first position is held by North American carrier Frontier Airlines, which has a fleet of 112 aircraft with an average age of 4.15 years. Asian operator IndiGo Airlines, with a fleet of 278 airliners, is in second place, at 4.28 years. Europe’s Wizz Air (147 aeroplanes) lies third, at 5.20 years. Fourth and fifth places are both held by Asian carriers, flydubai and Spring Airlines respectively. The 123 aircraft in the flydubai fleet have an average age of 5.25 years, while Spring Airlines’ 111 aeroplanes have an average age of 6.14 years. Within Africa, Uganda Airlines obviously also holds first place. In second place is Kenya’s Jambojet, whose six-aircraft fleet has an average age of 3.59 years. Third place is taken by Air Seychelles, with a fleet of seven aeroplanes with an average age of 5.07 years. Fourth is Réunion-based carrier Air Austral, whose 11 aircraft with an average age of 6.30 years. Fifth is Air Tanzania with a fleet of 13 with an average age of 6.56 years.