JSE-listed data and analytics services company PBT Group has been approved for a secondary listing on South African stock exchange A2X and its shares will be available for trade on A2X from February 1. PBT Group will retain its primary listing on the JSE and its issued share capital will be unaffected by its secondary listing on A2X. PBT Group has a market capitalisation of R975-million and is a technology- and cloud-agnostic data and digital services and solutions provider. PBT Group employs 840 staff members, the vast majority being billable consultants. Revenue is derived 89% from South Africa, 7% from Australia and 4% from Europe. PBT Group’s clients are large, mostly public companies operating in various industries including financial services, telecommunications, retail, medical and energy. The services across the group include advisory and strategic service, data engineering, analytics and visualisation, cloud and development operations (DevOps), application and software development, software quality assurance and testing, mobile and Web development, user interface and user experience, and healthcare sector-specific software solutions, the company says. “We are excited to give our shareholders an additional trading venue where the benefits offered by A2X accrue to our shareholders,” says PBT Group CEO Elizna Read. The addition of PBT Group to the A2X board will bring the number of instruments available for trade on A2X to 61, with a combined market capitalisation of about R5.2-trillion. These companies include Top 40 constituents, such as Aspen, Growthpoint, Mr Price, Investec, Naspers, NEPI Rockcastle, Prosus, Standard Bank, Sanlam and Sasol, says A2X CEO Kevin Brady. “We are pleased to welcome PBT Group to A2X. Having a respected data specialist list on A2X further endorses the real benefits available to both industry and shareholders by having the choice to transact on a low-cost platform. “A secondary listing complements a company’s primary listing and comes with no cost, risk or additional regulatory requirements. Every listed company should do the same,” he adds.