DP World Luanda, which has the concession to manage and operate the Port of Luanda’s multipurpose terminal (MPT), in Angola, has launched a new digital tracking platform, called CARGOES Flow. CARGOES Flow, designed by DP World’s Technology Group, is a digital cargo tracking platform which enables Port of Luanda users to monitor their shipments from origin to destination. This enterprise tracking tool for intermodal shipments provides customers with supply-chain visibility and helps to mitigate delays and monetary risks, says DP World. “The system allows customers to consistently know the availability of their products throughout their supply chain, making it easier than ever to forecast and plan their order processing.” Users can access the single window platform on the shipment page, and then enter their tracking information to have real-time visibility of their cargo movements. They can also see completed shipments, tracking history, detected exceptions, estimated time of arrival for changes or rollovers. The container page allows the customer to view data about each container, such as entry and exit times. Customers can opt-in to receive email notifications in case of relevant events and exceptions in the transport process. The main dashboard provides a report containing details regarding each respective shipment in transit, including its current location and any exceptions that require attention. Using the calendar page, customers can view daily departures and arrivals of shipments at each location. CARGOES Flow also allows customers the ability to generate reports on their logistics networks and to highlight opportunities to improve; to provide analytics that help users collaborate with the right business partners; and to configure email notifications for events of interest, such as consignment arrival and changes to estimated time of arrival. “With CARGOES Flow, companies will have a better overview of what is happening with their cargo from the moment it is loaded, through its arrival at its destination and the eventual return of the empty containers,” says DP World Luanda commercial director Patrick Andersson. “We know this platform will heighten efficiency in the Angolan port sector and provide never before seen customer operational transparency. It will no longer be necessary for customers to call or send emails to DP World to find out whether containers have arrived – this information will be available to them in real time.”