A South African-developed e-learning education system has been made available to more than 2 000 pupils in the Eastern Cape, Limpopo, KwaZulu-Natal, the Free State and Gauteng – many of them underprivileged. The system, which was developed by education technology (ed-tech) business Odin Education – a division of South African technology company Jendamark Automation – comprises a locked digital tablet that can only be used for educational purposes, curriculum-aligned content which is personalised for each user, and full-time online support. The technology uses behavioural data to learn which educational content pupils are enjoying most and then pushes more of it to them. The aim of the system is to supplement in-person schooling. Each device is loaded with mobile data, educational apps and learning platforms, and is tailored to each pupil’s subject choices. It then gathers information from its user’s interactions and serves them more of the academic and extramural content in which they are interested. The e-learning system, which is being distributed privately through corporate social investment (CSI) initiatives, will next be provided to learners in the Western Cape. The most recent recipients of the system were 215 Grade 12 pupils at Gqeberha’s Woolhope Secondary School, in the Eastern Cape, who received their digital devices towards the end of January. The donation was sponsored by couplings supplier SJM Flex, financial company DG Capital and technology developer Rockwell Automation. “If this is used effectively, every pupil who has one will benefit,” Woolhope Secondary School principal AJ Jaram said at the handover event last month. He said Odin Education’s ed-tech system would help equip pupils for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, which was changing the way we lived and worked. Woolhope Secondary School student leader Beyonce Jacobs, who had the opportunity to trial the Odin Education system with fellow students last year, claimed it had helped deliver a 100% pass rate for her Grade 11 class – despite the disruptions caused by Covid-19. “It’s quite stressful, not coming to school every day and knowing that there are trials and final exams coming up. The Odin Education system will take a bit of the pressure off because our textbooks are on it, plus it also has many more ways to explore and learn,” she explained. Woolhope Secondary School learner Sinovuyo George added that the system represented a significant leap forward from the WhatsApp chat forums they had previously used for learning during lockdown. “This is better, because there are videos explaining the entire lesson, among other learning resources,” she said. SJM Flex human resources manager Rajes Padayachie – a Woolhope Secondary School alumna – said many of the company employees’ children attended the school. “Our social responsibility initiatives are aimed at the empowerment of both our employees and the broader community. We believe that enriching the lives and minds of young people is investing in a self-reliant, dynamic and independent generation,” she said. Padayachie said the company would explore ways to donate additional devices to learners. For Rockwell Automation, one of the standout features of the Odin Education system was that it was designed in such a way that pupils could not use mobile data for social media or applications other than e-learning. “Therefore, we are able to monitor the real value of the programme to learners,” said Rockwell Automation industry account manager Devendree Ankiah. The opportunity to provide access to educational resources and being able to choose the beneficiary school for the donation of the devices were attractive aspects to the company. “We have invested heavily in [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education. To collaborate with a company focused on education is something that speaks to our hearts,” she said. “Education is where our future opportunities lie, and we regard education as the backbone of any promising career. Being able to support this cause by way of technological investment is a great way for DG Capital to assist in shaping the lives of our future leaders,” added DG Capital director David Edwards. Odin Education head Ajit Gopalakrishnan noted that CSI was key to getting more digital devices rolled out countrywide. “It’s a [CSI] programme that has a quantifiable impact and can be tailored to any company’s regional footprint, while also delivering real-time [return on investment] impact reports and [broad-based black economic empowerment] points in return,” he concluded.