The South East Asian archipelagic Republic of Indonesia has ordered 42 Dassault Rafale fighters, it was announced at the contract signing ceremony in the country’s capital of Jakarta, on Thursday. This is the seventh export order won by the French “omnirole” fighter. The contract provides a complete turnkey package for the Indonesian Air Force (officially designated the Tentara Nasional Indonesia Angkatan Udara or Indonesian National Army Air Force). The package includes pilot training, the creation of a training centre with two full-mission simulators and logistical support at several Indonesian air bases. Further, there will be significant industrial benefits for the Indonesian manufacturing industry. These will benefit not just the aeronautical sector (which is significant in Indonesia) but also all other major sectors which are also covered by a wide portfolio of dual civil-military technologies developed by Dassault Aviation and its partners in the Rafale, Safran Aircraft Engines and Thales. “It is a great honour for Dassault Aviation to see the Rafale join the highly prestigious Tentara Nasional Indonesia Angkatan Udara air force, and I would like to thank the Indonesian authorities for the trust they have placed in us,” said company CEO Eric Trappier in Jakarta. “This contract marks the start of a long-term partnership that will see Dassault Aviation rapidly step up its presence in the country. It also demonstrates the strong bond between Indonesia and France and reinforces the position of the world’s largest archipelago as a key power on the international stage. I am confident that the Rafale will meet the operational needs of the Indonesian Air Force, actively contributing to the defence and sovereignty of the Republic of Indonesia.” The value of the deal was not announced by the company. But the Reuters news agency placed it at $8.1-billion. Reportedly, the first six jets will be delivered over the next few months, with the remaining 36 following later. Apart from France (where it serves with both the French Air Force and Navy), the Rafale is already in service with Egypt, Greece, India and Qatar, and has been ordered by Croatia and the United Arab Emirates. Apart from the Rafale, Dassault Aviation also produces business jets, uncrewed aerial vehicles and space systems. Its revenues in 2020 came to €5.5-billion.