The representative body of the global airline industry, the International Air Transport Association (Iata), has launched an online platform to help airlines more efficiently implement the Iata Ground Operations Manual (IGOM). This manual is the globally recognised standard for ground handling of aircraft and related systems, irrespective of geography or climate. The online platform is called the IGOM Portal. Using it, and with the IGOM as their primary reference source, ground service providers (GSPs) and airlines can exchange information on their ground handling needs, including any variations regarding these requirements. “Safe and secure on-time turnarounds are a priority for airlines and a critical deliverable for GSPs,” highlighted Iata SVP Operations, Safety and Security Nick Careen. “Standardisation of procedures through IGOM is a key enabler. But it must be implemented to be effective. The IGOM Portal will provide the means to understand variances and manage adoption.” The IGOM Portal provides simplified verifiable communications for airlines and GSPs. All notification and acknowledgement functions are fully traceable. It also provides real time updates to the IGOM. It has a comparison function which allows a digital ‘gap analysis’ between the requirements of the IGOM and the manuals being used by airlines and GSPs (so the portal can be used for benchmarking). And it permits the viewing of all local variations at all locations, so providing a network overview of the adoption of IGOM. The IGOM Portal is open to all airlines and GSPs, at no cost to them. “The safety gains from global standardisation have been proven as aviation has developed,” he pointed out. “Along with facilitating global adoption of IGOM, the IGOM Portal will establish a baseline to measure and manage the global adoption of IGOM which will also lead to significant efficiency gains. With greater standardisation, for example, GSPs will see a reduced need for airline specific training and will more easily be able to deploy staff across multiple customers.”