Vehicle propulsion systems manufacturer Rolls-Royce and luxury jet and helicopter service provider Luxaviation Group have agreed, through a memorandum of understanding (MoU), to collaborate on developing advanced air mobility (AAM) solutions. Both companies share a vision of AAM solutions, including all-electric and hybrid-electric vertical take-off and landing (VTOL), as well as fixed-wing commuter aircraft. Through the partnership, Rolls-Royce will provide electrification solutions, maintenance support services and digital solutions for Luxaviation Group’s planned network of VTOL airports, otherwise known as vertiports. Luxaviation has a presence at over 120 VIP air terminals globally. The MoU between Rolls-Royce Electrical, Rolls-Royce Power Systems and Luxaviation focuses on operations, vertiports and surrounding infrastructure to support AAM markets that will transform the way people travel by air. The strategic partnership will look at three main areas, including charging and energy infrastructure for vertiports, maintenance provision for electric aircraft and digital solutions for related applications across AAM. The first deliverable of this partnership will be the creation and implementation of a pilot project outlining electrical solutions. Rolls-Royce Electrical president Rob Watson says the company will be a significant provider of all-electric and hybrid-electric power and propulsion systems for AAM with this partnership. “As part of our strategy, we are looking to ensure we understand how we can deliver maintenance and services for these new aircraft, building on our existing maintenance, repair and operations, and analytics capabilities.” He adds that the strategic partnership also leverages capabilities and technology across Rolls-Royce as the company develops the electrical power and propulsion systems for electric VTOL and commuter aircraft. “Rolls-Royce is set to build on our existing network to offer maintenance services for electrical systems. Rolls-Royce Power Systems is able to offer microgrid solutions to support fast-charging of electric aircraft and deliver reliable, cost-effective and climate-friendly, sustainable power to vertiports,” says Watson. Luxaviation strategy head and business aviation support services president Christophe Lapierre says the company is convinced Rolls-Royce and Luxaviation – with a global network, talent, expertise and vision across the entire value chain – will accelerate the deployment of AAM through this strategic partnership. “Our common vision to enable early adoption by leveraging existing capabilities places this partnership at an advanced position, considerably pushing the evolution of this new industry segment. “Our concept is to provide a solution that is agile and in continuous evolution to scale up AAM operations alongside regulatory development pace and market demand,” he says. Rolls-Royce Power Systems CEO Andreas Schell says Rolls-Royce will offer integrated solutions from a single source across its business units. “Power Systems can already supply climate-friendly microgrids that combine renewable energy sources, battery storage and conventional power generation. “Soon we will also offer them with fuel cell generators, hydrogen engines and electrolysers. This is another demonstration of how Rolls-Royce is helping make aviation more sustainable,” he says. With over 60 years of experience in operations, fixed-based operator passenger services and hundreds of aircraft under management, Luxaviation Group has launched various projects promoting the future of AAM.