South Africa’s National Nuclear Regulator (NNR) has reported that the country’s (and Africa’s) only operating nuclear power plant (NPP), at Koeberg near Cape Town, had for the past decade complied consistently with regulations concerning occupational exposure and public doses of radiation. The NNR was created in 1999 and exists to protect people, property and the environment from nuclear damage. It does so through the establishment of regulatory practices and safety standards optimised for South Africa, and through oversight and assurance activities. Koeberg is owned and operated by the country’s national State-owned electricity utility, Eskom. It is composed of two reactors, known simply as Units 1 and 2. Unit 1 entered operation in 1984 and Unit 2 in 1985. Each unit has a net generating capacity of 930 MWe. The NPP’s current licensing term will expire on July 21, 2024. The NNR also highlighted that installing new steam generators at Koeberg, and extending the operational life of the plant, were separate projects involving separate applications and separate regulatory procedures. Further, the agency oversaw all refurbishment, replacement, modification, modernisation and any other alteration projects at the NPP. In all such activities, the NNR was involved from the start of the planning process, through the shutdown of the unit, to its return-to-service. As part of its activities, the regulator carried out thorough technical assessments. The agency also pointed out that it was normal for improvements and modifications to be made at NPPs during shutdown periods. This represented an application of the ‘continuous improvement’ principle and allowed safety to be increased and so demonstrated a good safety culture. Such shutdowns also opened the way to extending the life of an NPP. Planning started long before the implementation of any changes and upgrades. Thus, the NNR noted, Eskom first informed the regulator of a possible intent to replace Koeberg’s steam generators as long ago as 2011. NNR involvement in the steam generator replacement project started in 2013/14. NNR approval to replace Koeberg’s steam generators for Unit 2 was actually given on January 18, this year, only after a thorough safety and technical review. “The regulatory approval of the replacement of the Koeberg steam generators does not automatically imply the approval of Koeberg Long Term Operations (LTO [that is, life extension]),” explained NRR NPP divisional executive Orion Phillips. “The decision to grant or refuse Eskom’s application for LTO would be subject to further review and acceptance of a separate safety case for LTO.” “The NNR expects to receive the LTO application safety case by July 2022,” he elucidated. “This is in accordance with the regulation 3(3) of the Regulations on the Long Term Operation of Nuclear Installations, R266, published on 26 March 2021. The NNR’s nuclear licensing process for LTO comprises a structured process to ensure compliance with safety standards and regulatory requirements. These activities range from administrative reviews, technical reviews, on-site inspections, and public participation as appropriate.”