Real estate investment trust Attacq and joint venture partner D2E Properties report that the Midrand Waterfall precinct-based high‐rise residential development The Mix Waterfall has achieved R250-million in sales since officially launching in late July 2021. Set for completion in early 2024, The Mix will comprise 371 upmarket apartments and is the most recent in a series of successful residential developments within Waterfall City. Situated atop the Mall of Africa, the 14‐storey, New York-styled apartment offering has been designed to appeal to homeowners seeking safe and secure apartment living with all the advantages of a sophisticated, bustling, urban experience, according to the developers. D2E CEO Robin Magid says the way developers engage with the communities around them has drastically changed in the past year. “New trends in workweek flexibility and the growing demand for work‐life balance are all converging to inform home and investment decisions.” As property developers, he says D2E’s job is to understand and answer these evolving needs by developing unique product offerings for the ever‐more discerning buyers of today. Waterfall City is the largest greenfield urban concept development in South Africa. Built on 2 200 ha of land, the region has quickly become a significant business and lifestyle precinct in Gauteng, with major clients such as Deloitte, PwC, Accenture, BMW and Dischem occupying space there. The developers state that, for most companies, flexible work options have gone from being a consequence of the pandemic to a core benefit, informing where employees choose to live, work and play. In this regard, The Mix’s strategic placement near scenic walking and cycling routes make travelling to work easy. In addition, its proximity to parks, green spaces and access to various lifestyle amenities make it “ideal” for those in search of an enhanced work‐life balance, the developers state. “Increasingly, buyers are considering quality of life enhancers such as convenient access to retail, entertainment and outdoor experiences as part of the non‐negotiables in their property decision‐making process,” says Magid. The developers claim that The Mix presents an affordable entry into Waterfall’s highly competitive property market with studio, one- and two‐bedroom apartments available from R999 000. “As Attacq, we want to build an inclusive city, one that reflects the aspirations and potential of the people of South Africa. Key to this is the development of different asset classes tailored for different market segments,” says Attacq CEO Jackie van Niekerk. She adds that The Mix is suitable for a range of people from those who are starting their careers and moving out on their own, to those who are looking to downsize in a safe lock up and go environment. “We recognised the opportunity in developing a residential offering that spoke to the long‐term aspirations of our community and provided a foothold into Waterfall’s competitive property market.” Centralised living that is strategically positioned to cater to the needs of a diverse resident community is driving sales at The Mix, the developers report. The proposition includes access to a fitness and wellness centre, co‐working spaces, amphitheatre, rooftop pool and cafe, and an array of retail facilities to enjoy within the Waterfall precinct. Further, smart technologies will be integrated into the building, enabling residents to personalise their living experiences further.