Impact investor Norsad Finance is rebranding to Norsad Capital. This rebranding is in line with the company’s strategic growth levers, mainly, to widen the footprint of Norsad in the Southern African region, to diversify operations in sub-Saharan Africa and to expand the sustainable infrastructure finance offering of the business. CE Kenny Nwosu says these growth levers will drive the impact of Norsad Capital over the next decade, inform the rebranding and take Norsad into new territories and forms of financing, to change the very nature of the business from a financing resource to a provider of capital for sustainable, social impact-focused growth on the African subcontinent. The growth strategy to scale and deepen its impact is set to entrench Norsad Capital as the premium private debt provider servicing African businesses that prioritise sustainable social development, the company posits. “The revised and refreshed Norsad Capital brand aligns with our objective of powering growth across sub-Saharan Africa by providing longer-term risk capital to companies that are financially, socially and environmentally sustainable. We have identified markets for expansion and we embark on our growth strategy confident that we will make a palpable and far-reaching difference to millions,” Nwosu says. To date, Norsad Capital has invested over $500-million in more than 150 businesses across 12 Southern African countries. Norsad Capital is backed by a combination of Nordic and African investors. The investment focus is on impact projects, mainly, services and products that focus on renewable energy; food value chain related enterprises; initiatives in education; and financial services providers that deliver accessible, inclusive services. “Our purpose is to build a better Africa through providing capital to initiatives and businesses whose goals focus as much on sustainability as they do on profit. With the rebranding comes a fresh focus on capital provision for sustainable growth. Norsad Capital is looking to the future, unlocking new opportunities, leading by example and committed to a business model – that has partnerships and diversity at its core – that delivers exceptional results for the continent we are deeply invested in,” Nwosu says.