South Africa’s Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE) has issued a statement supporting the release of a request for information (RFI) by the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (Necsa) for a new multipurpose nuclear research reactor (MPR). The department noted that the project, to replace the existing SAFARI-1 research reactor, had been approved by the Cabinet last September. SAFARI-1 is located at Necsa’s complex at Pelindaba, west of Pretoria. “The DMRE believes that this project will ensure South Africa remains amongst the top four global radioisotopes producers as well ensuring continuation of research and development on nuclear technology,” affirmed the department in its statement. “This places Necsa on path to provide much needed radioactive isotopes for medical and industrial applications, execution of research through beam lines, bolster massive infrastructure development and create thousands of sustainable jobs which are essential for our economy.” The DMRE reiterated that the RFI was just that: an exercise to gather information and test the MPR vendor market. It was not, the department emphasised, a competitive tender. Its results would not be used as a first step in placing an order or contract. Nor would it be used to exclude a supplier from participating in a competitive tender. The RFI had been published on Necsa’s website and on the National Treasury’s tender platforms. It had also been published on global tender websites. The closing date for responses to the RFI was 30 days after the date of its issue (which was February 6). “SAFARI-1 has been operating since 1965 and is scheduled for decommissioning in 2030,” pointed out the DMRE. “This research reactor has placed South Africa among global leading producers of medical radioisotopes used to diagnose and treat illnesses such as cancer. Replacing SAFARI-1 with [an MPR] will make sure that the country continues its legacy for [the] peaceful use of nuclear technology for socioeconomic development.”