The current CEO of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Dr Thulani Dlamini, has been reappointed to the position, for a second five-year term. Dlamini started his first term as CEO of the science council in 2017. His new term came into effect on Tuesday. The CSIR board made its decision unanimously. CSIR board chairperson Professor Thokozani Majozi praised Dlamini’s achievements at the helm of the organisation. “Foremost among these is the repositioning of the organisation to align with the country’s industrial needs through the commercialisation of our technologies, transformation of the science, engineering and technology base within the CSIR, as well as the accentuation of our visibility and accessibility,” highlighted Majozi. “While there is still more work to be done, the CSIR now has demographic and gender representatively at the highest levels of the scientific ladder, which are Principal and Chief Researchers.” In its statement, the CSIR pointed out that, when he was first appointed its CEO, Dlamini had aimed at ensuring that the science council made a real and noteworthy contribution to the country’s industrial development (in line with its organisational mandate). This required that the CSIR be restructured so as to be able to meet the needs of the private sector, while still being able to assist in the establishment of a ‘capable State’ in cooperation with government and other State-owned agencies. In all these endeavours and initiatives, “significant” progress had been achieved, the science council affirmed. “I am honoured by the opportunity to continue leading the evolution of this prestigious organisation for the next five years, and I look forward to building on the progress and momentum of the past five years,” said Dlamini. “The advent of Covid-19 has delayed the full implementation of our strategy, nonetheless the next five years will see the CSIR further unlocking the potential of its innovations to make a difference in collaboration with our partners in industry and government.” And regarding the Covid-19 pandemic, Majozi highlighted the role played by the CSIR in South Africa’s response to the disease. He pointed out that the science council had been at “the forefront” of that response and that its contribution could not “be overemphasised”. For example, when the country’s medical sector was suffering from a shortage of ventilators, the CSIR had, in cooperation with local partners, developed a local ventilator, which had saved lives. And the agency had developed monitoring and analysis tools that had helped the government understand population movement patterns in specific areas, including vulnerable, high-risk and virus hot spot areas.