SpaceLogistics, a unit of major US aerospace and defence group Northrop Grumman, has signed an agreement with space company SpaceX to launch the former’s Mission Robotics Vehicle (MRV) in early 2024. The MRV is a second-generation development of SpaceLogistics’ two Mission Extension Vehicles (MEV-1 and MEV-2). Like them, the MRV is intended to extend the operational life of orbiting satellites. Since 2020, the MEV-1 and MEV-2 have provided propulsion and pointing control to commercial satellites in geosynchronous equatorial orbit (GEO, also known as geostationary orbit). The MRV, however, will use a robotic arm to fit each client’s orbiting satellite with a Mission Extension Pod (MEP). The MEP, also a product of SpaceLogistics, is a self-contained propulsion system, which can increase the life of a 2 000 kg GEO satellite by up to six years. The MEP will be owned and controlled by the client. Simultaneously with the MRV launch contract announcement, SpaceLogistics also reported that it had sold its first MEP, to Australian satellite owner and operator, Optus. The MRV will install an MEP on the Australian company’s D3 satellite in 2025. “Our contracts with SpaceX and Optus are tangible evidence of our momentum and commitment to deliver second-generation on-orbit servicing technologies to the satellite industry,” affirmed SpaceLogistics business development VP Joseph Anderson. “We are thrilled to have Optus as our premier MEP customer as we continue pioneering the future of space and expanding the realm of what is possible with on-orbit servicing and sustainment.” Both the MRV and MEP passed their preliminary design reviews in the northern autumn of last year and are on course for their critical design reviews, during this year. When launched in 2024, the first MRV will carry several MEPs. In addition to fitting orbiting satellites with MEPs, the MRV will also be able to carry out detailed inspection, repair and relocation of satellites. It will be the first spacecraft capable of providing such services persistently, to GEO satellites. “Satellite owners are demonstrating enthusiasm and confidence for our life-extension solutions and the potential cost-savings they could provide,” he highlighted. “Our Optus contract represents our third service contract with commercial satellite providers, and with several signed term sheets in queue our installation manifest for MEPs is already full for 2025 and nearly full for 2026.”