Daimler Truck, the Traton Group and Volvo Group have signed an agreement to create a joint venture (JV) to install and operate a high-performance public charging network for battery electric, heavy-duty long-haul trucks and coaches across Europe. The parties say they are committed to initiating and accelerating the necessary implementation of charging infrastructure to cater for the increasing number of electric vehicle customers in Europe, and to contribute to climate-neutral transportation in Europe by 2050. The planned JV — to be equally owned by the three parties — is scheduled to start operations this year, following the completion of all regulatory approval processes. The parties are together committing to invest €500-million, which is assumed to be by far the largest charging infrastructure investment in the European heavy-duty truck industry to date. The plan is to install and operate at least 1 700 high-performance green energy charging points on and close to highways, as well as at logistic and destination points, all within five years of the establishment of the JV. The number of charging points is, over time, set to increase by adding partners to the JV, as well as through public funding. The future JV is planned to operate under its own corporate identity and is to be based in Amsterdam, Netherlands. “[This is] great news for the transport industry and society, as it underlines all of the partners’ strong commitment to making carbon-neutral trucks a reality,” says Daimler Truck CEO Martin Daum. “It is remarkable that three fierce competitors in the area of trucks and vehicle technology are taking action together to start establishing the needed charging infrastructure. “Together with Volvo Group and the Traton Group, we want to send a clear signal to all relevant stakeholders to follow our lead and act now.” “We have the strong opinion that we as the Traton Group, together with our brands Scania and MAN, as well as the commercial vehicle industry as a whole, will be part of the solution when it comes to a carbon-neutral world,” adds Traton Group CEO Christian Levin. “A collaboration with strong competitors like Daimler Truck and Volvo Group might seem unusual. “However, the topic is of crucial importance and this unique cooperation will make us faster and more successful in delivering the transformational action needed to tackle climate change.” A report published in May last year by the European Automobile Manufacturers Association called for up to 15 000 high-performance public and destination charging points to be rolled out by no later than 2025, and up to 50 000 high-performance charging points by no later than 2030.