German premium car manufacturer Audi has officially launched its e-tron range in South Africa. The range of electric vehicles (EVs) includes three e-tron 55 derivatives, the e-tron 55 Sportback, e-tron S Sportback, and the pinnacle of the line-up, the high-performance models in the form of the e-tron GT and RS e-tron GT. “Never has any automotive brand anywhere in the world launched this many electric vehicles in one go,” says Audi South Africa head Sascha Sauer. “By accelerating our transition towards e-mobility, we are fully embracing Audi’s global mission in transforming towards a provider of premium sustainable mobility, in line with our brand’s global commitments towards the Paris Climate Agreement.” Audi says its transition towards electric mobility has yielded positive results for the e-tron model range around the world already. This is evident in Audi’s fully electric car deliveries in 2021, which increased by 58% year-on-year. Additionally, Audi more than doubled its product portfolio of fully electric models in the past year. “From 2022 onwards, Audi South Africa is committed to grow the e-tron model range locally. [We’ll] introduce at least one new electric model each year, to grow consumer choice and to demonstrate our commitment in securing a leading EV position within the premium automotive market from the start here in South Africa,” says Sauer. The Audi e-tron 55 First Edition
As part of Audi’s e-tron launch efforts, an e-tron 55 First Edition will be available for sale in South Africa from the second half of the year through Audi’s ten e-tron dealerships nationwide. The e-tron 55 First Edition will be available in limited numbers and for a limited time. This model will start from R1.75-million and is the entry point into the e-tron range at launch. As with all Audi e-tron models, the first edition model is supported by a five year/100 000 km Audi freeway maintenance plan and an 8 year/160 000 km battery warranty. Pricing for the e-tron range is as follows: The e-tron 55 First Edition – R1.75-million The e-tron 55 Advanced – R1.99-million The  e-tron 55 S line – R2.04-million The e-tron 55 Sportback S line – R2.11-million The e-tron S Sportback – R2.42-million The e-tron GT – R2.71-million The RS e-tron GT – R3.3-million