Energy research and projects organisation the Global Energy Association has seen a sharp rise in the number of countries represented by candidates for the yearly Global Energy Prize. The association hopes to expand its international representation, as developing countries are playing an increasingly significant role in world energy, says president Sergey Brilev. In 2021, the association received 106 nominations. In 2019, there were candidates representing 12 countries – in 2021 that number had risen to 39. There has also been a rise in the number of applications in each category, namely in conventional energy from 16 to 34, in non-conventional energy from 13 to 45 and in new ways of energy application from 10 to 27. The association has started accepting submissions for the 2022 awards. “We have traditionally come to expect large numbers of submissions from Europe and North America, and in future we are hoping to expand our international representation, all the more so as developing countries are playing an increasingly significant role in world energy. “Africa is a major exporter of liquefied natural gas (LNG); India and China are the drivers behind demand for fossil fuels and renewable energy; and Latin America is one of the leaders in installed capacity of hydropower. Further, countries in the Middle East determine, to a great extent, the situation on oil markets,” Brilev highlights. The Global Energy Prize is designed to honour research and scientific developments in the fuel and energy sector, which make energy more accessible to consumers and safer for the environment. The prize fund is worth $520 000. Since 2003, 11 African countries, namely Algeria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Egypt, Gambia, Ghana, Madagascar, Nigeria, South Africa, Togo and Zimbabwe, have participated in nomination cycles of the Global Energy Prize. “Over the past two years, Global Energy has doubled the number of prize nominees and the prizes cover the whole scope of research and innovation. All this contributes highly to the level of research and development in energy worldwide,” said Global Energy board of trustees member and Association of Power Utilities of Africa general director Abel Didier Tella. “The association welcomes representatives from all over the world, and especially all over the African continent, to participate in the Global Energy Prize by nominating their colleagues with innovative energy breakthroughs. We will be happy to receive applications through to March 20.” The nomination cycle will take place in three stages. In the first stage, from December 1 to March 20, nomination submissions will be accepted. According to the Association’s rules, self-nomination is prohibited. Applications are accepted from scientists, researchers and representatives of academic organisations prepared to present expanded grounds for the nomination, as well as a list of key achievements and scientific work of the potential nominee, Global Energy says. Applications will then be turned over to independent experts for an examination; they will proceed with an assessment of the candidates’ achievements according to an established set of criteria, including their scientific novelty and their practical value. At the conclusion of the experts’ work, a short list made up of the 15 best applications, five in each category, will be established on the basis of which the International Award Committee will select the laureates at a closed session. The results of the session will be announced in July. The presentation of the prizes will take place during the twenty-fifth World Energy Congress in St Petersburg, Russia, from October 24 to 27.