African mobility fintech company Moove has partnered with CFAO Motors to acquire more than 5 000 new Suzuki vehicles across Ghana and Nigeria. CFAO Motors is a subsidiary of CFAO Automotive, Africa’s largest automotive distribution network, with a presence in 36 countries. Moove is a vehicle financing and vehicle supply partner for Uber in sub-Saharan Africa. Moove says it is “firmly positioned to rapidly expand its fleet”, leveraging CFAO’s local market presence “to accelerate the delivery of brand-new vehicles to customers keen to start their entrepreneurial journey with [Moove]”. Per the new agreement, Moove will be able to provide a range of Suzuki cars, including the Alto, Swift, Celerio, Baleno, Dzire and S-Presso models, across Ghana and Nigeria. Moove's Drive-to-Own product allows prospective Uber drivers the opportunity to work towards owning their vehicles in either 30, 36 or 48 months, by paying over a percentage of their weekly income. They can also access other financial services through the Moove app. Africa has the lowest per capita vehicle ownership rate in the world. "Since our launch in July 2020, we've found tremendous traction across all of our markets and as we enter a new phase of growth, the importance of a local, pan-African supplier such as CFAO that can equip us to quickly respond to the needs of our customers simply can't be understated,” says Moove CEO Ladi Delano. As a result of the agreement, Moove customers will also have access to after-sales support, including repairs and maintenance. In order to address the environmental concerns surrounding the automotive sector, Moove has also made a commitment to ensure that at least 60% of the vehicles it finances are electric vehicles or hybrid models. Another goal is for 50% of its customers to be women. To date, Moove-financed cars have completed more than 2.6-million trips with over 30-million kilometres travelled across six markets, including Lagos, Accra, Johannesburg, Cape Town, Nairobi and Ibadan.