Five key areas of President Cyril Ramaphosa’s February 10 State of the Nation Address (SoNA) will be key to the success of municipalities rolling out services to South Africa’s citizens in the coming years, says professional services firm PwC. PwC government and public sector partner Craig Kesson and strategy and economics partner Lullu Krugel report that the SoNA provides South Africans an opportunity to understand the policy direction of the national government and a synthesis of its strategic approach over the next year. This year is especially critical for municipalities as they use it to establish the next cycle of their five-year plans. In this regard, the pair say that the insights offered by the SoNA into the local government sector have a particular reSoNAnce, as municipalities and metropolitan municipalities are responsible for 10% of consolidated (national, provincial and local) government expenditure and are the front-line providers of services to the citizenry. While a number of areas discussed by Ramaphosa in his SoNA are applicable to the municipal sector, the pair have identified five key areas that are especially relevant for the success of local government in the coming years. These five will require implementation plans to effect the necessary pace of delivery. The five key areas that PwC have identified include an elaboration on the Just Energy Transition and the role that municipalities are to play in resolving the energy crisis and addressing climate change. In this regard, Kesson and Krugel say a Just Transition ensures the livelihoods of communities in the transition to a low-carbon economy, as well as resolve the energy crisis and expand renewable energy to prevent further job losses from continued load-shedding. The focus on international funding is crucial especially in light of its ability to reform the energy sector, they say. However, the pair note that the need to understand the downstream implications of this transition on municipalities, which are at the frontlines of energy distribution, is necessary for the Just Transition to make local government part of the transformation process and not a point of failure. Secondly, Kesson and Krugel note there is a commitment to the delivery of infrastructure at all levels of the State, with municipal infrastructure provision being one of the most direct ways that people feel the impact of the State in their daily lives. After public corporations, the pair state that municipalities are the most important source of public capital spending, but that their capital spending has consistently declined in recent years, from R64-billion in 2016 to R41.2-billion in 2020. However, Kesson and Krugel note that infrastructure provision at this level has a variety of delivery challenges not always related to financing, while there are many municipalities that are unable to spend their budgets, thereby falling short on delivering their developmental objectives. “The reasons for these shortcomings need to be fully considered at the level of governance arrangement, administrative capacity and regulatory provisions,” suggest Kesson and Krugel. The third area for focus requires a commitment for greater permissions for broadband in municipalities to bridge digital divides in society, which PwC says is large in terms of social equity and access to opportunity. At present, only 1.5-million households make use of fixed-line broadband Internet, with the digital divide entrenching the overall inequality gap in South Africa. Kesson and Krugel note that broadband is the lifeblood of both consumers and businesses – a factor that became clearer during the Covid-19 pandemic. They say broadband infrastructure is critical for providing the backbone of digital transformation, and that the policy intersection of permissions, infrastructure investment, technology authorities, and licensing will require dedicated attention. The fourth area of focus – commitments to review water boards – will ensure better water quality for municipalities, including attention to monitoring standards and will be undertaken through the district development model (DDM). Ensuring South Africa – one of the 30 driest countries in the world – does not succumb to future droughts requires a focus on water quality as a resource and a level of formalisation of the structural and governance elements of the DDM. This, to ensure that the attainment of standards and the provision of relevant infrastructure for water provision takes place with more efficient mechanisms and without any confusion or additional bureaucracy. Its fifth area of focus involves greater focus on local economic recovery and growth to create opportunity, employment and fiscal revenues. In this regard, Kesson and Krugel say the DDM will need to demonstrate its potential to act as a value-adding delivery vehicle without some of the encumbrances or misfires of previous attempts to coordinate delivery among different roleplayers in the State. This includes the full role and operation of metros in the model given the fact that cities are key drivers of economic growth for national recovery. “The issues faced by local government have a particular immediacy to them as failures in this sector have a real and direct impact on lives immediately. The longer the failures continue, the more difficult it is to address them,” say Kesson and Krugel. They add that the macro-economic challenges identified in this year’s SoNA require a focus at the level of policy and implementation concurrently to ensure a level of change and impact in South Africa’s municipalities.