City Power disconnected electrical cables, worth R5-million, which had been used for illegal electricity connection in Gauteng. City Power's Revenue Protection Unit conducted an operation to cut off illegal electrical connections at informal settlements areas surrounding Rabie Ridge-Kanana Extension 4. According to the media relations manager at City Power, Isaac Mangena, over 2 000 kg of electrical cables were taken by the police and the Johannesburg Metropolitan Police Department after it was discovered the cables were used for illegal connection. "What happened was that those residing in informal settlements would tap into the electricity of the formalised houses, which then created an overload that led to power outage in the area. Community members have complained about this and have since brought the matter forward," said Mangena. The matter has also taken a toll on the safety of community members. "Several children have allegedly died in these informal settlements because of electrocution caused by these illegal connections," Mangena said. According to Mangena, residents facing power problems should engage with the Department of Human Settlements. Until then, City Power will continue the operation of cutting electricity in the City of Johannesburg. Mangena said this operation was part of the #BuyaMthembo campaign, which was launched by the Johannesburg mayor, Mpho Phalatse. "It is all about recouping the money that was lost due to the vandalism of our infrastructure, illegal power connection and bypassed meters that were not billed for electricity consumption," said Mangena. Electricity in the informal settlements will only be restored once the department has confirmed that these settlements are not situated on land that belongs to private individuals, the government or land that has been reserved for a certain development. The plan now is to intensify the electricity cut-offs and fight to ensure that every cent owed to City Power and the City of Johannesburg is recovered. The next step is to visit other informal and formal settlements in Johannesburg and, more especially, suburbs, who have the money, but choose not to pay for electricity.