On Sunday the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (Necsa) released its request for information (RFI) for a new multipurpose (nuclear) research reactor (MPR). This is intended to replace the organisation’s current 56-year old SAFARI-1 research reactor. The project was approved by the South African Cabinet in September last year. “The RFI process will assist us in sourcing out critical market inputs and validation of parameters to be deployed in the MPR financial model and thus also enable refinement of the project User Requirement Specification,” explained Necsa Group CE Loyiso Tyabashe. “This is in line with the process that needs to be followed leading to the searching for appointment of a preferred supplier for the construction of the MPR. The MPR will continue with the legacy of producing medical isotopes, which are used to treat thousands of patients diagnosed with cancer all over the world.” Despite its age, SAFARI-1’s operations ensure that Necsa wholly-owned subsidiary NTP Radioisotopes is one of the world’s top four radioisotope producers. NTP produces radioisotopes for both medical and industrial applications. However, SAFARI-1 now operates under a regime of care and age management, and its replacement will be necessary for NTP to maintain its place in the global radioisotope production sector. “Necsa has highly qualified technical experts who have been running the SAFARI-1 [reactor] since its commissioning in 1965, therefore the MPR will be in good hands,” he assured. “A good maintenance and aging management programme is also in place to make sure that there is [a] smooth transition from SAFARI-1 leading into MPR criticality, with no operational gaps or glitches.” The RFI has been released now in order to provide a “good” lead-time for the implementation of the MPR project, including procurement and construction. No contracts will be awarded as part of this RFI process, which is intended solely to gather information. Interested companies can respond to the entire RFI or to selected parts of it. “Necsa as the [sic] State-owned entity of the South African government is committed to ensuring that the MPR contributes towards the economy and skills development in the country,” highlighted Necsa board chairperson David Nicholls. “In terms of employment opportunities the MPR will create about 750 full-time jobs and [an] additional 3 800 indirect jobs for its operation and fulfilment of its research mandate during its operational lifetime.” SAFARI-1 is an internationally respected facility. It is seen as a centre of excellence in nuclear science and technology and as a resource for the whole of Africa.