On the International Day of Women and Girls in Science on February 11, the University of the Free State (UFS) is celebrating examples of areas in society where female UFS researchers are playing a critical role in science. UFS has implemented several interventions to increase the diversity of its researchers, including its women scientists, which has resulted in the percentage of its rated female researchers increasing from 27% in 2016 to 34% in 2021. Additionally, the university hosts several science leaders in the six National Research Foundation-funded South African Research Chairs Initiative. Four of these research chairs are held by women. These are research chairs in Vector-borne and Zoonotic Pathogens, Disease Resistance and Quality in Field Crops, Higher Education and Human Development, and Pathogenic Yeasts. MAIZE BIOFORTIFICATION
The PhD thesis of UFS Department of Plant Sciences PhD graduate in Plant Breeding Nakai Matongera is focusing on the development of high-yielding and nutrient-dense maize varieties enriched with provitamin A, zinc and essential amino acids, such as lysine and tryptophan. She is a maize breeder working at the Scientific and Industrial Research and Development Centre, in Harare, Zimbabwe, who is playing a key role in food sustainability in Africa with her research. “With my research, I aimed to develop zinc-enhanced maize varieties that have great potential to reduce zinc deficiency in maize-based developing countries in sub-Saharan Africa,” she explains. Zinc-enhanced hybrids were developed by crossing introduced zinc donors and locally adapted maize inbred lines from three nutritional categories, namely normal, provitamin A and quality protein maize (QPM). The hybrids were evaluated for agronomic and nutritional performance under optimum drought and low nitrogen conditions. “Results indicated that zinc-enhanced QPM hybrids accumulated high zinc under all growing conditions. However, the zinc-enhanced normal hybrids had the highest yield potential, implying dilution effects.” “I find my research rewarding, because this biofortification strategy to combat micronutrient deficiency is cost-effective and has wide coverage and sustainability compared to other strategies such as clinical supplementation and food fortification,” says Matongera. The outcomes of her research will one day, when it is implemented, change the lives of thousands of children in Africa who are suffering from zinc and iron deficiency. The shortage of zinc and iron in their diets affects their cognitive development as well as their immune systems, making them susceptible to a number of illnesses, including diarrhoea. According to Matongera’s superviser for her PhD study Professor Maryke Labuschagne, this research will have a practical impact in Africa, as it will contribute towards the nutritional value of food. VETERINARY PARASITOLOGY
UFS Department of Zoology and Entomology researcher Dr Nthatisi Nyembe focuses on veterinary parasitology and looks at the treatment and epidemiology of parasitic diseases in animals and humans. “I want to create a drug that will make life easier and healthier for animals, which will ensure the food we consume will also be healthy. The aim is to get to a point where I can find one compound that has various benefits on multiple micro-organisms,” she says. Nyembe was awarded a scholarship to complete her PhD studies in Japan, where she spent four years looking into creating compounds that can treat and prevent unwanted parasites in animals, with a specific focus on mice. SCHOOL SCIENCE
UFS researcher and Division of Social Responsibilities Projects (SRP) teacher educator Dr Angela Stott and colleagues are involved in several mathematics and science outreach interventions to teachers and learners. Science becomes fun for learners through the different initiatives created by Dr Stott and her colleagues. These include the online Learn Science programme, which Stott conceptualised, using tablets donated by equipment and asset management technology company IoT.nxt. In the Creative Clubs intervention, started by UFS SRP teacher educator Dr Joleen Hamilton, learners can take part in a MathArt competition and coding sessions. “This year, 100 higher-achieving Grade 9 learners from township schools will be mentored to prepare science fair projects for participation in the Expo for Young Scientists, and next year another 100 will be mentored,” she says. High-achieving learners from contexts of poverty respond well to such programmes and gain valuable knowledge, skills and values from them. There is a need for structure, while simultaneously supporting learners’ development of autonomy when mentoring a learner to produce a science fair project. The online programme, around which this year’s intervention is built, was informed by literature on what is most likely to improve benefits for the learners. “By researching the process, we will improve our understanding of how to maximise the benefits and mitigate the weaknesses that learners from poverty gain from such participation. This knowledge could help improve the effectiveness of such programmes throughout the country, and in other parts of the world where similar conditions apply,” says Stott.