The South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (Necsa) announced on Sunday that it was extending the deadline for responses to its Request for Information (RFI) regarding its Multi-Purpose Reactor (MPR) project, by 30 days, to this coming April 8, at 16:00 South African time. The extension is due to, in Necsa’s words, “the excellent global response” to the RFI and to allow the responders additional time so that they could supply more detailed information. The corporation highlighted that the RFI was not focused exclusively on the MPR itself. The RFI was looking at a wide range of components and services. In addition to the nuclear reactor, these were: a neutron beamline centre and associated equipment; facilities for fuel and material testing (by irradiation); the manufacturing of fuel and target plates; and on-site accommodation or lodging. Companies interested in any of these opportunities should register with Necsa and supply information on the products and services that they could offer. Because of the number of questions seeking clarification that Necsa had received, the agency would hold two online briefing sessions on Thursday (March 3) at 08h00 and 14h00 respectively, South African time. The RFI itself could be accessed on the Necsa website and on the National Treasury tender platform. It was also available on a number of global tender websites. Respondents did not have to respond to every aspect of the RFI, although they could if they desired. They could just concentrate on those specific aspects of the RFI that they were interested in, and which fitted their knowledge and capabilities. “Necsa, in collaboration with the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy, is committed to deliver the Multi-Purpose Reactor that will sustain and grow South Africa as a leader in peaceful applications of nuclear technology,” affirmed the corporation. “It is important to note that Necsa will not award any contracts in the RFI process, as it is purely for information gathering purposes.”