Internet services multinational Google will expand its two-step verification (2SV) process for log-ins to enhance account security after its newly introduced 2SV initiative contributed to a 50% drop in account breaches for 150-million Gmail and two-million YouTube creator accounts. The 2SV introduces the use of mobile phones to confirm a user’s identity every time one accesses their Google account from a different device. Aligning with this year’s global Safer Internet Day theme, which is Together for a better Internet, Google is actively working on new technologies that will provide a secure, seamless sign-in experience and eliminate reliance on passwords that have turned out to be a major cause of data breaches and phishing attempts. “Users often find passwords hard to remember and have to update them regularly,” the company adds. In 2021, Google accelerated its effort to eliminate password threats by starting to auto-enroll users in 2SV, providing people with an additional layer of security when cybercriminals attempt to hack into their accounts. Through the initiative, more than 1.5-billion security checks were done. “This decrease speaks volumes about how having a second form of verification can be effective in protecting your data and personal information,” says Google government affairs and public policy senior manager Abongile Mashele. “We do not just plug security holes, we work to eliminate entire classes of threats for people who depend on our services. Today alone, billions of people around the world will use our products to help with things big and small from conducting e-payment transactions or teaching an online class full of students. It is our responsibility to keep users’ personal information safe and secure. “While we are proud of these initial results and happy with the response we have received from our users and the community, we are excited about other ongoing behind-the-scenes work intended to make our users even safer,” she says. Google provides tools like Security Checkup, which provides users with practical tips on how to increase the security of their Google account. To improve online security, Google recommends running frequent security checkups to ensure accounts are prepared for recovery by adding a phone number and a backup email. It secures accounts and prevents bad actors from gaining access. “Additionally, Google recommends using Google Password Manager, which is built directly into Chrome, Android and the Google App, to create safe passwords for all online accounts, including shopping, banking and e-learning sites,” says Mashele.