The alliance of Renault, Nissan and Mitsubishi Motors has announced that it will launch 35 new electric vehicles (EVs) by 2030, based on five common EV platforms. “The three member-companies have defined a common roadmap towards 2030, sharing investments in future electrification and connectivity projects,” says alliance chairperson Jean-Dominique Senard. “These are massive investments that none of the three companies could make alone. Together, we are making the difference for a new and global sustainable future – the alliance becoming carbon neutral by 2050.” The alliance says it has already invested more than €10-billion in the field of electrification. In the main markets of Europe, Japan, the US and China, 15 alliance plants produce parts, motors and batteries for ten EV models already on the street, with more than one-million EVs sold so far, and 30-billion e-kilometres driven. Building on this, the alliance plans to accelerate its onslaught on the global EV market with an additional investment of €23-billion over the next five years, leading to 35 new EV models by 2030. The five common EV platforms are: CMF-AEV, an affordable platform. KEI-EV, a mini-vehicle platform for ultra-compact EVs. LCV-EV, a family platform for professional customers, and also the base for the Renault Kangoo. CMF-BEV. This platform – “the most competitive compact electric platform in the world” – is to be launched in 2024. It will provide up to 400 km in range, and will be the base for 250 000 vehicles a year under the Renault, Alpine and Nissan brands. Among the vehicles are a new compact EV that will replace the Nissan Micra. CMF-EV. This global, flexible EV platform will soon be on the road as the base for the Nissan Ariya EV crossover and Renault Megane E-Tech Electric. It has been created to host a new, high-performance motor and an ultra-thin battery. By 2030, more than 15 models will be based on this platform, with up to 1.5-million cars produced a year, says the alliance. Battery Strategy
The alliance says it hopes to reduce battery costs by 50% by 2026, and by 65% by 2028. By 2030, the alliance believes it will have a total of 220 GWh battery production capacity for EVs across key production sites in the world. Beyond that, the alliance shares a common vision for all-solid-state battery technology (ASSB). ASSB should have double the energy density versus current liquid lithium-ion batteries. Charging time will also be greatly reduced to one-third. The aim is to mass produce ASSB by mid-2028, says the alliance.      