The South African National Space Agency (Sansa) announced on Monday that its CEO, Dr Val Munsami, had resigned. His resignation also took effect on Monday, although it was apparently submitted some time before, but not previously announced. No reason for his resignation was given but he had held the post for five years and reportedly had often told colleagues that he would not serve beyond five years. The wording of the agency’s press release (“the process … continues”) suggested that a search for a permanent replacement was already under way. In the interim, the MD of Sansa’s Earth Observation division, Andiswa Mlisa, would serve as acting CEO for the next six months. Munsami has a PhD in physics, a Masters degree in business leadership, a diploma in space studies, and an International Air, Space, and Telecommunications Law certificate. Sansa highlighted that he had “made significant progress to elevate the profile and implement aspirational programmes and establish critical partnerships for the success of Sansa.” Prior to joining Sansa, he had been heavily involved in the development of radio astronomy in South Africa. He led the process that elaborated the South African Multi-Wavelength Astronomy Strategy and the Square Kilometre (radio telescope) Array Strategy for Africa. He helped develop the country’s National Space Policy and National Space Strategy and played a key role in the creation of Sansa. He served, and continues to serve, on a number of continental and international space bodies. To give only one example, he was currently the Chair of the Administrative Committee for Developing Countries and Emerging Communities of the International Astronautics Federation (IAF). (Previously, he had been a VP of the IAF.) “[Sansa] and [its] board are saddened to have Dr Munsami leave as the future of Sansa is being cemented through a revived strategy looking to fulfil a greater mandate and the developments arising from the Space Infrastructure Hub for the benefit of growing the space economy and creating skills and employment with an efficient space industry,” affirmed the agency.