Local bourse the JSE is growing its enterprise development initiatives through a series of speed coaching sessions aimed at assisting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to scale up, raise capital and create jobs. The online speed coaching targets founder-led, entrepreneurial South African businesses that have been in operation for at least two years. “As part of its commitment to address unemployment, economic growth and skills enhancement in South Africa, the JSE will host free online speed coaching events that will provide guidance and tips on how to address some of the major challenges holding SMEs and entrepreneurs back,” the JSE says. Two experienced coaches will provide their perspectives and guidance on distinguishing and marketing your business, which will be held between February 16 and March 23; financial health and financing of your business that will run between May and July; and managing a growing business to be held between September and November. The sessions will enable participants and coaches to engage, as there will be a live question and answer session on the YouTube chat box. The first event will kick off on February 16 from 17:30 to 18:30. “These sessions are suited for SMEs that are poised for growth. The companies wishing to participate must be founder-led with an appetite to give back to the South African entrepreneurial ecosystem,” says JSE SME development head Cleola Kunene. “Through this programme, the JSE also aims to contribute to the country’s transformation agenda. We have sent out invitations far and wide, hoping to attract companies with racially and gender diverse management teams.” The speed coaching sessions complement the JSE Enterprise Acceleration Programme that launched last year to help grow companies with a R20-million turnover. With the pilot programme now complete, the nine-month programme has started with a cohort of 12 companies. These companies will be provided with high-quality, high-impact training to help them grow their market share, access funding and improve their competitiveness.