Trans African Concessions (Trac) says it will go ahead with the construction of the much-anticipated Montrose interchange. This project, valued at R248-million, officially kicked off at the beginning of this year, and will see the upgrading of the existing at-grade intersection to a grade-separated free-flow interchange. The first phase of this project will include blasting activities to realign 600 m of the existing Schoemanskloof carriageway. The initiative will also include the construction of four new interchange ramps and the widening of the existing two-lane crocodile bridge from two to five lanes. In addition, two new arch bridges will be constructed to cross the existing Elands Valley section, and to accommodate two new ramps. New high-mast lighting will also be installed to illuminate the new interchange. This project is being managed by a Wilson Bayly Holmes-Ovcon (WBHO)/Motheo JV, and is expected to take 15 months, with the provisional completion date set for June next year. Trac says it believes that the Montrose interchange will create a free-flow, split-level interchange that will greatly improve traffic flow, similar to the two interchanges – Machado and Karino – that were recently constructed on the route. The rehabilitation project for section 5A between Wonderfontein and Belfast will also start this month. Roadworks, being done under the management of Actophambili Roads and valued at R244-million, will include the rehabilitation and improvement of the existing road, which is set to be completed by December 2023. With the start of these projects comes the conclusion of another – the upgrade between Kaapmuiden and Kaalrug in the Nkomazi region. This 15.5-km portion of the Maputo Corridor now has a four-lane carriageway and a rehabilitated road surface. Emalahleni – Middelburg Road 
Noticeable progress has also been made on Trac’s other major construction projects underway on the South African side of the N4 Route, says the concessionaire. The rehabilitation project between the OR Tambo and Van Dyksdrift interchanges in the Highveld region is 85% complete, with completion expected in March. The R380-million project, being built by Raubex Construction, includes removing and replacing concrete slabs from the originally constructed concrete surfaced road, overlaying the entire section with asphalt and constructing an additional seven kilometres of passing lanes. Belfast-Machado Rehabilitation and Upgrade
The major upgrade between Belfast and Machadodorp is progressing well and is 90% complete, notes Trac. The R400-million project, undertaken by WBHO, includes constructing an additional lane per direction and thus upgrading this section to a four-lane road. A new interchange at Machadodorp was built under this project and officially opened in September. Roadwork teams have started  an additional component of this project – the construction of the Milly’s underpass – which, together with the remaining roadworks, is scheduled for completion in June this year. Karino Interchange
The Mbombela-based Karino interchange project is valued at R390-million and is 88% complete. Implemented by Raubex Construction, it constitutes the upgrading of the existing intersection into a grade-separated interchange, with on- and off-ramps. The project also includes a bridge that will separate cross-traffic from through-traffic to ease flow at the busy intersection. Although the project has experienced unforeseen delays, it is progressing steadily, with completion scheduled for March, notes Trac.