Long-standing Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority (TCTA) executive team member Johann Claassens has retired, effective June 30. Johannes Mavuso was appointed at the start of June as a successor to Claassens, with the handover process now completed. Claassens, who has been involved with the establishment of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP) since 1987, has overseen the implementation of multibillion-rand water infrastructure projects since joining TCTA in 1994. He oversaw the implementation of LHWP on behalf of the governments of South Africa and Lesotho after being appointed by the then-Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry as a South African Delegate on the Lesotho Highlands Water Commission (LHWC). Claassens relocated to TCTA’s head office in Centurion in 2002, as Phase 2B of the LHWP neared completion, to take up the position of project manager for the implementation of the Berg water project in the Western Cape and later became the executive manager responsible for implementing all of TCTA’s bulk raw water projects while still serving as a delegate on the LHWC. “It has been an exciting journey working for TCTA. I was fortunate to live my passion for water over the past three decades being involved in a number of exciting projects towards enhancing water security for our people,” says Claassens. “Claassens has given his all in ensuring that TCTA remains one of the best institutions in project management and implementation. TCTA has lost a very valuable member, his contribution and passion for the organisation will be sorely missed,” says TCTA CEO Percy Sechemane, expressing his appreciation for the value added to the sector over the years. The professional life of Mavuso, who has led various diverse project teams and amassed a wealth of knowledge and experience in project management, project controls, contract administration and leadership, spans over 20 years and covers initiating, planning and delivering mega infrastructure projects across South Africa, Mozambique and Qatar. “I look forward to leveraging my experience, and that which already exists within TCTA, to enable the organisation to continue delivering value through water infrastructure projects,” he says. “Water is a critical resource and enabler for social and economic development locally and internationally. Therefore, TCTA is well-positioned to be the world-class enabler of sustainable infrastructure for a water-secure South Africa. I firmly believe that I made the right choice by being part of this strategic and crucial entity in the country,” he concludes.