Telecommunications group MTN has appointed new CEOs for its operations in Cameroon, Rwanda and Uganda, effective September 1. MTN has also created a new senior MTN Group post: operations executive for Liberia, Guinea-Conakry, Guinea-Bissau and Congo-Brazzaville effective August 1, reporting to senior VP: markets Ebenezer Asante-Twum. MTN Rwanda CEO Mitwa Ng’ambi has been appointed MTN Cameroon CEO, succeeding Stephen Blewett, who is leaving the group, while MTN South Africa chief consumer officer Mapula Bodibe will take the helm at MTN Rwanda. Sylvia Mulinge has been appointed as MTN Uganda CEO, joining from Safaricom, where she served as chief consumer business officer. Mulinge replaces Wim Vanhelleputte, who will take on the new MTN Group role of operations executive: markets, where he will leverage his experience in furthering financial inclusion and strengthening MTN’s position as a market leader. Vanhelleputte is a former MTN Côte d’Ivoire CEO and has extensive operational experience across Africa. “The appointment of these executives, all with strong track records of execution and results, adds to our confidence on delivery of our Ambition 2025 strategy,” says MTN Group president and CEO Ralph Mupita. Ng’ambi, who worked in MTN’s Benin and Zambian operations, oversaw the listing of MTN Rwanda as well as the establishment of its fintech subsidiary, while Bodibe brings with her more than 15 years’ experience with MTN, including in Uganda, with a strong background in commercial strategy, consumer marketing, customer strategy, brand management and communications, product management and customer analytics. Mulinge is a seasoned executive with a passion for transforming customers’ lives using technology. “My thanks to Stephen for his valuable contribution to the MTN Group over the years and wish him well as he journeys to new opportunities outside of the African continent. I welcome Sylvia to the Y’ello family and look forward to working with her, as well as with Mitwa, Mapula and Wim in their new roles, as we continue to execute on our Ambition 2025 strategy,” says Mupita.