Radio frequency (RF) technology holding and investment company Alaris Holdings has expanded its European footprint with the acquisition of Germany-based Kuhne electronic for an undisclosed amount. The acquisition establishes a valuable base in Europe that supports the company’s global expansion, which will result in a direct impact on future growth. A share purchase agreement was signed on June 28, with the closing date of the transaction June 30. The Alaris Holdings Group currently comprises five entities, namely South Africa-based Alaris Antennas; Finland-based COJOT; mWAVE Industries and Alaris USA, both based in Maine; and Linwave Technologies in the UK. “Alaris has set out to complement the group with strong RF/microwave electronics design and RF assembly capabilities,” says Alaris Holdings Group CEO Juergen Dresel, adding that Kuhne electronic provides a valuable footprint in the European market. Owner-managed Kuhne electronic, which was founded in 1994, is an RF and microwave electronics engineering company which develops, manufactures, and sells products and components into the healthcare, industrial, radio amateur and defence market segments. Located in Berg, Bavaria, in Germany, the firm has an in-house design and development team and a manufacturing department capable of supporting both prototype product build and medium scale batch manufacture, including a pick and place capability. Their laboratory is equipped with high-quality, innovative measurement technology to address their specialised range. Kuhne electronic’s diverse and technically mature product spectrum ranges from highly linear power amplifiers for digital television and super-low-noise preamplifiers for research in the field of radio astronomy to bidirectional amplifiers and signal generators for RF heating. The acquisition of Kuhne electronics is complementary to Linwave Technology. “There are significant synergies between Linwave and Kuhne, including complementary product ranges, supply chain diversification and production capabilities, which provide undoubtedly valuable advantages to the group and our strategic roadmaps,” Dresel adds. “Kuhne electronic is excited to become part of an international group of companies, thereby exploiting synergies to create new business opportunities. I think there is a great rapport between Kuhne electronic and Alaris Holdings and we were very warmly received, which is an excellent foundation,” says Kuhne CEO Jutta Kuhne. The addition of Kuhne electronic to the Alaris Holdings group of companies will advance Kuhne electronic’s drive to become even more subsystem oriented, she adds. The enhanced strong competency in RF/microwave electronics design and manufacture complements the existing product offering and positions Alaris Holdings and its subsidiaries to take a distinctive lead in its existing market.