Stellantis has introduced an ‘Electric-As-You-Go’ rental programme to selected markets. The long-term rental programme, dedicated to battery electric vehicles (EVs), requires an initial down payment, with a monthly fee of €110 onwards, plus a cost-of-use fee of 7c a km (with 500 km set as the minimum mileage a month). Customers can currently choose between a Peugeot e-208, Opel Corsa-e, or Opel Mokka-e. However, the programme will soon be extended to other EVs within the vehicle manufacturer's portfolio. The Electric-As-You-Go programme is currently available in France for private customers who wish to change their old vehicle for an EV, in what Stellantis says is “an affordable and sustainable solution”. In France, customers are eligible for the offer when they buy a new EV and hand in return either a diesel vehicle registered before 2011, or a petrol one registered before 2006. To this extent, this initiative makes it easier for the client to replace an old, ‘dirty’ vehicle, with a new EV. The programme is expected to expand to other countries in Europe soon. Europe is set to ban the sale of internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles by 2035. Stellantis views the programme as a “beneficial and affordable solution” to provide access to EVs, which are still more expensive than ICE vehicles. “The main goal of the programme is to offer the opportunity to better adapt the total cost of the vehicle to its real use. “It is a long-term rental, requiring a competitive down payment and an unbeatable monthly fee, plus a variable cost calculated on the kilometres actually travelled thanks to the connectivity feature embedded in all the groups’ EVs,” notes Stellantis. “Inspired by the "Pay-per-Use" trend, increasingly popular with consumers in various sectors, this programme offers consumers the possibility to pay for their vehicles only when they are actually using them. “Combined with the lower operational cost of EVs, this initiative results in a breakthrough commercial offer that [enables] ‘EVs for all’.” 