Transnet National Ports Authority (TNPA) will invest R16.1-billion at the Mossel Bay, Saldanha and Cape Town ports in a seven-year capital investment programme. The capital investment programme will see R2.2-billion flow to the Port of Mossel Bay, R8.4-billion to the Saldanha harbour and R5.5-billion to the Port of Cape Town. “Our capital investment plan demonstrates our commitment to the operationalisation of our reimagined TNPA operating model that was launched in 2021,” says TNPA western region managing executive advocate Phyllis Difeto. She says the aim is to prioritise capital projects that will create future capacity, while also answering the immediate need for enhanced port efficiency. Looking at the current financial year, TNPA aims to invest R452-million in the western region ports. At the Port of Mossel Bay some of the key capital projects include a slipway facility refurbishment and Quay 3 sheet pilling. These key projects all form part of the port’s R10.2-million port infrastructure development plan for 2022/23. Projects that are spread across the seven-year period include the deepening of the port and Quay 4, as well as a breakwater extension. The capital projects planned for the Port of Saldanha for 2022/23, valued at R182-million, are already underway, and include the acquisition of a tugboat, installation of perimeter fencing and provision of bulk power. The broader seven-year programme includes the extension of Berth 205, berth construction, as well as the refurbishment of the main breakwater and causeway rock revetment. In the current financial year, the Port of Cape Town will see the delivery of a R260-million capital programme. This includes the procurement of a helicopter and the replacement of two tugboats. Phase 2 of the Cape Town Container Terminal expansion and the acquisition of ten dry dock cranes all form part of the port’s seven-year capital programme. Difeto says that she is confident that the realisation of the port infrastructure and superstructure development plans will translate into improved port efficiency. “As we sharpen our focus on capital investment deliverables, we acknowledge the historical under-expenditure,” she notes. “It is for this reason that we have adopted a fresh approach to project execution – an approach that ensures all hands-on deck from the project sponsors, engineers and support teams through participation in capex war rooms,” adds TNPA infrastructure GM Thecla Mneney.