Telecommunications group Telkom has announced several changes to its board and a reconfiguration of its committees. As independent nonexecutive directors Navin Kapila; Fagmeedah Petersen-Cook; and Kholeka Mzondeki retire and will not be available for re-election, and Rex Tomlinson resigns, all effective August 24, the company has appointed Brian Kennedy; Prudence Lebina; Mteto Nyati; and Ipeleng Selele as independent nonexecutive directors effective July 15. The new appointments, in terms of Telkom’s nomination policy, align the necessary skills and experience required by the company. Following the changes to the board of directors, Telkom will reconfigure its board committees, effective August 25. Lebina will succeed Mzondeki as a member of the audit committee. Mzondeki will also retire as a member and chairperson of the social and ethics committee; while Kapila retires and Sibusiso Luthuli resigns to take up the role of chairperson of the investment and transactions committee. Ethel Matenge-Sebesho will be appointed as the chairperson of the committee, and Kennedy and Selele will be appointed as members. As remuneration committee chairperson Tomlinson and member Mzondeki retire, Kennedy will be appointed as chairperson and Nyati will be appointed as a member. On the nominations committee, Petersen-Cook and Tomlinson will retire as members, with Nyati and Selele appointed as members. Sung Hyuck Yoon will succeed Petersen-Cook as a member of the risk committee. Petersen-Cook will also retire as a member and chairperson of the investment and transactions committee, Kapila and Tomlinson will retire as members and Dr Sibusiso Sibisi will resign as a member. Alongside Luthuli, who will be appointed as chairperson, Yoon, Kennedy and Lebina will be appointed as members. All Telkom board committees remain duly constituted, the company said in an update to shareholders. “Telkom welcomes Lebina, Selele, Kennedy and Nyati to the board of directors and looks forward to their contributions to the company. It further extends its gratitude to Mzondeki, Peterson-Cook, Kapila and Tomlinson for their contribution over the years, and wishes them well in their future endeavours.”