BMW Group South Africa (BMW SA) has expanded its electric vehicle (EV) range with the addition of the i4 and iX3. The BMW i4 is a four-door gran coupé and the German car maker’s first purely electric model focused squarely on driving dynamics from the outset. Initially only one model variant will be available from launch – the BMW i4 M50. This performance model uses one electric motor at the front axle and another at the rear to deliver system output of 400 kW. True to the spirit of the M range, the vehicle can sprint from zero to 100 km/h in 3.9 seconds. Range is up to 510 km. In a short mid-journey stop at a high-power charging station, the car’s range can be increased by as much as 140 km within 10 minutes from a 10% charge level. The BMW i4 model in South Africa is supplied with the BMW charging card, a flexible fast charger for charging at up to 11 kW and a mode 2 charging cable. The vehicle is priced at R1.6-million. The BMW iX3 sports activity vehicle is the electric version of the X3 made in Pretoria at the Rosslyn plant. The range of the vehicle before the battery is depleted is up to 460 km, with ten-minute fast charging adding around 100 km of range. Acceleration from zero to 100 km/h happens in 6.8 seconds. The vehicle is priced from R1.29-million. With the internal combustion engine BMW X3 made in South Africa, is there an opportunity for its electric sibling to be produced locally? BMW SA spokesperson Hailey Philander says it is not possible for the local company to comment on future production plans. However, she adds that the Rosslyn plant remains “an important part” of the global BMW group production network. “Currently, up to 96% of BMW X3 production is destined for export markets and many of the markets that BMW group plant Rosslyn traditionally supplies are shifting towards EVs. “The BMW group is considering the introduction of electrified drivetrain vehicles for future production at BMW group plant Rosslyn,” notes Philander. “Key to this, though, would be a review of the local industrial policy to, in particular, support the expansion of general infrastructure projects, and foster an environment that supports the local manufacture of EVs and EV components. “BMW SA has been – and continues to – work closely with government and other stakeholders in the country to advance the electromobility agenda in South Africa. We welcome any developments that can encourage the wider adoption of electromobility in South Africa.” Government is yet to complete its sector support and development policy for the local manufacture and introduction of EVs. The term ‘electrified vehicle’ includes hybrids and plug-in-hybrids. 