Brazil-based major aerospace group Embraer has announced that it has partnered with US-based major aeroengine group Pratt & Whitney (P&W) to successfully test-fly an Embraer E195-E2 airliner with one of its P&W GTF engines running on 100% sustainable aviation fuel (SAF). The test flight was executed in the US, following two days of ground tests, at the end of last month. The E195-E2 is the largest and latest-generation airliner produced by Embraer, capable of taking up to 146 passengers in a single-class configuration. It is powered by two PW1900G engines, the smallest version of the new-generation P&W GTF family (GTF standing for geared turbofan). All P&W engines and all Embraer aircraft are currently certified to operate using fuel blends with up to 50% SAF. “The E2 is already the most efficient single-aisle aircraft flying today, saving up to 25% CO2 emissions compared to previous generation aircraft,” highlighted Embraer Commercial Aviation VP: strategy and sustainability Rodrigo Silva e Souza. “This reduction in emissions can be increased to an impressive 85% with 100% SAF. Replacement of older aircraft by new-generation products and scaling up SAF production are the two most effective actions commercial aviation can take now to achieve a significant reduction in emissions. Embraer and Pratt & Whitney are leading the industry with products that are more efficient for our customers and more sustainable for our society. This test demonstrates that the E2 is ready for 100% SAF certification and operation once the industry finalises standards.” “SAF is a core part of our sustainability road map, and we continue to work with industry partners and regulators to support the development of a drop-in standard for 100% SAF,” pointed out P&W chief sustainability officer Graham Webb. “This test proves that GTF engines can operate on any fuel, and that the E-Jets E2 family is ready for 100% SAF certification once the industry finalises the standard for unblended SAF.” The SAF used in the test was sourced from a company called World Energy. It consisted entirely of Hydroprocessed Esters and Fatty Acids Synthetic Paraffinic Kerosine, which is a form of renewable feedstock aviation fuel and is regarded, by the Commercial Aviation Alternative Fuels Initiative, as one of the leading alternatives to conventional jet fuel.