Diversified miner Anglo American has launched the second phase of its education programme in South Africa, doubling the programme's scope and commitment to improving educational outcomes, investing an additional R510-million into the programme as it progresses. The next phase of the programme will support an additional cohort of 84 schools and about 80 early childhood development (ECD) centres in Limpopo, the Northern Cape and North West over the next five years. Of the total investment, R110-million will go toward enhancing access to quality school infrastructure for learners and teachers. Over the past four years, the education programme has improved the quality of education for 222 000 learners and 3 391 teachers at 109 schools and 110 ECD centres. This was achieved through investing more than R100-million a year. Anglo American South Africa chairperson Nolitha Fakude says that, by doubling its investment and targeting specific outcomes, the miner is going beyond simply acknowledging the fundamental right of every child to quality education, and is “making it happen”. Undertaken in partnership with the Department of Basic Education, the education programme is integral to Anglo American's Sustainable Mining Plan, which commits the company to a holistic range of ambitious goals that are shaping how its stakeholders experience Anglo American’s business. These goals include how the miner creates thriving communities by focusing on better health, education and employment opportunities for communities around its operations. Anglo American states that ensuring all children in its host communities have access to excellent education and training provides an essential gateway to tertiary education and will ultimately help increase the employability of young people throughout their working lives. Fakude adds that, by supporting access to better education and school infrastructure, creating sustainable jobs and contributing to brighter and healthier futures, Anglo American is delivering a lasting positive contribution, supporting communities to thrive beyond the life of its mines. “Our partnerships with the Department of Basic Education and other key stakeholders are fundamental to the success of the programme and the transformational impact we can have as a responsible business,” she says. By 2027, Anglo American will have invested more than R1-billion in improving educational outcomes in South Africa, with the ultimate target for schools in host communities being to perform within the top 20% of State schools nationally by 2030 – per the ambitions of Anglo American’s Sustainable Mining Plan. Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga says the department recognises that partnerships are key to resolving some of the challenges South Africa’s education ecosystem faces as a result of its vast basic education sector. “Therefore, our partnership with Anglo American is a tangible example of what can be achieved when business and government partner to make a lasting difference, especially in education, which is the country's priority focus.” She adds that the continuation of Anglo American’s impactful education programme makes the company one of the most significant private-sector contributors to South Africa’s education system. In South Africa, the miner has supported education programmes from primary to tertiary levels and has assisted with building much needed infrastructure for learning institutions across the country as well as providing bursaries to students in key disciplines. Further, despite the disruptions caused by Covid-19 lockdowns, the results of the programme’s first phase showed improved learner performance, above the provincial averages, for participating schools in Anglo American’s host communities in Limpopo and the Northern Cape. In this regard, the matric pass rate for participating schools in Limpopo in 2021 was 76%, compared to the provincial average of 66.7%. Eight out of 32 participating schools in the province were in the top 30% of national school performance, with five schools in the top 20%. In the Northern Cape, schools on the programme experienced a 76.1% pass rate, compared to the provincial average of 71.4%. The number of students that wrote school leaving exams (matric) in 2021 was 36% higher than in 2020 – a time when school dropout rates tripled in South Africa. Anglo American global education and community skills head Zaheera Soomar says the company is looking forward to building on its success by focusing on developing well-rounded learners who can navigate the exciting future ahead of them. “This can only be done if we get the fundamentals right while also supporting them to develop the skills of the future wherever they may be.” Going forward, the miner will invest in several initiatives, including infrastructure upgrades, information and communications technology, learner and parent support initiatives, career guidance, nutrition and food gardens, afterschool programmes and sporting activities in the selected schools. The programme has also set new learner-focused targets, including that 90% of learners aged five meet the minimum requirements for school readiness, that 90% of grade 3 learners pass with at least 50% in numeracy and literacy, and that 75% of grade 6 learners pass with at least 50% in mathematics and English as a first additional language. In addition, Anglo American has also set the target of achieving a 90% matriculation pass rate, with a 50% university entrance, and getting 65% of grade 12 learners to pass with at least 50% in mathematics.