Toyota Motor Corporation, Hino Motors, Isuzu Motors, Denso Corporation and Commercial Japan Partnership Technologies Corporation (CJPT) have announced that they have started foundational research on developing hydrogen engines for heavy-duty commercial vehicles, with the aim of further utilising internal combustion engines as one option to achieve carbon neutrality. On the road to carbon neutrality, there are various powertrain options to meet customer demands, including hybrid electric vehicles, battery electric vehicles and fuel-cell electric vehicles Isuzu, Denso, Toyota, Hino, and CJPT believe, however, that hydrogen-powered engines are also one solution to this issue, and will use the technology and know-how each company has accumulated to study the potential of hydrogen engines in heavy-duty commercial vehicles. A hydrogen-engine-powered Corolla has, for example, participated in Japan’s Super Taikyu motor racing series since May last year. Fuel-cell Light-duty Truck
Toyota, Hino, Isuzu and CJPT have also announced that they would jointly develop light-duty fuel-cell electric trucks for the mass market. The companies are also set to promote the introduction of fuel-cell electric trucks to the market, along with their widespread use. Light-duty trucks are often used by supermarkets and convenience stores for distribution purposes, in addition to supporting people's daily lives, says the partnership. These trucks are also often equipped with refrigeration and freezing functions, as they are required to drive long distances over extended hours to perform multiple delivery operations in one day. Furthermore, they must also meet requirements such as fast refuelling. The use of fuel-cell technology, which runs on high-energy-density hydrogen and has zero emissions while driving, is considered effective under such operating conditions. CJPT will be responsible for planning the jointly developed mass-market light-duty fuel-cell electric trucks. The four companies will mobilise their combined knowledge – the truck technology that Isuzu and Hino have accumulated over the years, as well as Toyota's fuel-cell technology – in pursuit of products that meet the performance and conditions required for light-duty trucks. The first truck will be introduced to the market as soon as 2023, and used by the partners at actual distribution sites in Fukushima Prefecture and Tokyo social implementation projects, in Japan.