Omnichannel and cloud communications company Infobip has implemented its Answers chatbot solution at mobile network operator Africell. Africell is a fast-growing mobile network operator with a pan-African footprint, providing fast and reliable mobile network coverage and related technology services to more than 15-million subscribers. The company operates in four African countries – Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone and The Gambia, says Africell operations director Nadia Moati. Infobip’s Answers solution is a chatbot-building platform that enables organisations to build, test and deploy highly-customised chatbots of different types. It is a mature and proven system for automating and improving interaction with subscribers. “By deploying the Answers chatbot solution, we will be able to advance our customer engagement strategy and provide contextual support via automated communication. The solution will result in time-saving related to addressing basic queries and FAQs from customers, without the need to escalate these to the call centre,” she says. Further, the artificial intelligence-driven chatbot solution is available 24/7 and ensures consistency in terms of the information provided to customers, as well as allowing the mobile operator to measure its customer support centre performance. “After the successful launch in our key markets, we are now analysing customer interaction and their comments about the solution to make adjustments as necessary and provide an optimised customer experience,” explains Moati. “The integration process between the Answers chatbot solution and Africell’s different network nodes was smooth and professional. Judging from the ease of the onboarding process, the interface appears to be really user-friendly,” she adds. With the Covid-19 pandemic accelerating digital transformation and impacting the telecommunications industry heavily, the key to stand out is to identify the market’s needs and develop a solution that will make customer service a seamless journey, says Infobip Telecom Partnerships Africa head Mirza Bukva. “Through our customer engagement solutions and the launch of the WhatsApp chatbot service, we have enabled Africell to communicate more efficiently with its subscribers and implement the latest trends in customer communications. “It’s an honour to partner with Africell across their four operating company footprints and I am certain this will lead to immediate improvements and increased customer satisfaction,” he says.