Applied Electric Vehicle Energy Reticulation Systems Africa (Aeversa) has added a battery electric panel van (EPV) to its electric vehicle (EV) product portfolio. The EPV is a Joylong, from Jiangte Joylong Automobile in China. Aeversa aims to assist traditional transport fleets in transitioning to electric fleets, using renewable energy. The company says it offers a complete solution, from specifying the required vehicles, to planning and installing charging infrastructure. Aeversa’s product offering also includes the provision of maintenance services and financing options for the requisite infrastructure and vehicles. Aeversa CEO Rick Franz says EVs are potentially more reliable and less expensive to maintain, with fewer moving parts than their internal combustion engine (ICE) counterparts. "Fueling EVs is also cheaper, as electricity rates are far more predictable than the oil price.” Aeversa introduced its first EV, a 3t JAC N55 truck, into transport fleets during the first semester of last year, “achieving massive savings compared to conventional ICE trucks”. This triggered the introduction of the EPV, in order to compare its performance against conventional panel vans. "Our new panel van is a real winner,” says Franz. “It is suitable for a range of last-mile deliveries, providing a reliable, economical and safe solution to transport operators. “Compared to conventional panel vans, our panel van has a 70% lower maintenance cost and achieves a 40% to 60% lower fuel/energy cost when charged from our infrastructure," notes Franz. This charging infrastructure is powered by solar energy, or any alternative energy source, and uses stationary energy storage facilities. Management software also enables operators to optimise their fleets' energy consumption, schedule charging times and monitor vehicle maintenance to minimise downtime. "Five years ago, the idea of an EPV that could compete with an ICE option was a pipe dream,” says Franz. “However, EPVs make more and more sense each year as battery ranges improve and payload capacities increase.” The Joylong features an air-conditioner and a legal seating arrangement for the driver and five passengers. When standard European CCS2-Combo connections are used, the battery recharges to 100% in 90 minutes, allowing for a 350 km operating range per charge, says Aeversa.