Industry organisation the KwaZulu-Natal Master Builders and Allied Industries Association has elected an executive council for the next term of office and Marcus Gonzalves, of FS Gonzalves Construction, was designated as president. It also announced plans to contribute to the growth of the construction industry. “These are challenging economic times and we need to join hands in resuscitating the construction industry. Under my leadership, I will strive towards vigorously pursuing a sustainable construction industry as we participate in the rebuilding process,” said Gonzalves. Emphasis would be placed on enhancing lobbying and advocacy with participation at key industry platforms, facilitating work opportunities for members through engagement with developers and funders, increasing infrastructure investment and skills development in the industry. “The industry has been in ‘crisis mode’ since 2020 and this has led to serious challenges. However, the association remained steadfast in its commitment to keep both the Association and the industry afloat during these tough times,” commented outgoing KwaZulu-Natal Master Builders and Allied Industries Association president Bhekisisa Ngcongo. Further, considering the state of the economy during the period under review, the association was relieved to close the financial year with 715 members, with increased growth in the small business member category, the association’s executive director Vikashnee Harbhajan said. “As we move towards a new year, we would like to assure members that the Association will continue to be unrelenting in its efforts to represent your best interests at all levels, as we continue to lobby and advocate for a more sustainable construction industry,” she added. The association represents member companies in the KwaZulu-Natal construction value chain and provides them with specialist support services. It reported on its financial performance during its annual general meeting, held on June 28, and the association again received an unqualified audit report.