Digital financial services company TymeBank has appointed Yusuf Dockrat as CFO, Linda Appie as chief marketing officer and Bruce Paveley as chief technology officer (CTO), as it focuses on boosting the bank’s growth trajectory. The latest appointments bring additional strength and diversity to TymeBank’s senior leadership team, as it focuses on boosting the bank’s growth trajectory and unique value proposition. “Running a digital bank requires unique skills and attributes. We are extremely fortunate that two of the appointments come from within the group, while our new CFO is a seasoned banker who will help sharpen our focus on reaching profitability in 2023. “I am excited to welcome these talented and experienced individuals to TymeBank’s senior leadership team,” TymeBank CEO Coen Jonker says. Dockrat is a qualified chartered accountant with 20 years of financial services experience. His most recent role was HBZ Bank South Africa CFO and senior VP. “As CFO of TymeBank, Yusuf will play a key role in the bank’s growth trajectory, as well as developing business strategies and aligning them to financial outcomes,” TymeBank says. Meanwhile, Appie has oversight of planning and execution of the bank’s research, marketing and communication initiatives. She joined TymeBank in 2020 as head of marketing, bringing marketing experience in emerging markets and a strong track record in delivering results in marketing and innovation projects across the various brands she has worked for in her career. “Prior to joining TymeBank, she occupied brand management roles at Coca-Cola and Tiger Brands. She holds a Bachelor of Business Science from the University of Cape Town and a Master of Business Administration from the Gordon Institute of Business Science,” the bank says. Meanwhile, Paveley has 32 years of experience in the technology field, mostly in the banking sector. His experience spans application development, information technology (IT), business and fraud operations, architecture, design, Amazon Web Services cloud and cybersecurity. He has been with Tyme Group since 2017 as head of technology innovation, data and infrastructure. “Paveley has held several senior roles at Standard Bank, including infrastructure products and services head, and spent several years at listed IT services and solutions company Faritec as a consultant to various companies. “In his new role as CTO, Bruce will be responsible for TymeBank’s IT, Cyber and Operations teams and will also play a significant role in introducing new products and services as a key business enabler,” TymeBank says.