UK-based global major aerospace and defence group BAE Systems (BAE) is leading the development and construction of a sixth-generation fighter technology demonstration aircraft, the British Defence Secretary (Cabinet Minister) Ben Wallace announced on Monday, on the first day of the renowned Farnborough Air Show. This demonstrator fighter will fly within the next five years. The demonstrator programme, although led by BAE, will also involve the UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) and other companies, spread across the UK. Together, they form a consortium known as Team Tempest. The other main members of Team Tempest are Leonardo UK (radar, other sensors and communications systems), MBDA UK (weapons) and Rolls-Royce (propulsion). The demonstrator aircraft will prove the design principles and technologies that will be used to produce Britain’s Future Combat Air System (FCAS). The intent is for the FCAS aircraft, now also being called Tempest, to enter service with the UK Royal Air Force in 2035. “We recognise our responsibility in providing trusted sovereign combat air capability,” assured BAE Systems CE Charles Woodburn. “We’re partnering with the UK’s highly motivated and skilled supply chain to accelerate the innovation of the nation’s future air power; integrating new technologies so the Royal Air Force and its allies can stay ahead of our adversaries. The demonstrator is an exciting once-in-a-generation opportunity providing experienced and young engineers alike a chance to contribute to an endeavour which really matters to our national defence and security.” The Tempest demonstrator will be the first flying crewed combat aircraft demonstrator “in a generation” (in BAE’s words). The last such demonstrator was the then British Aerospace’s Experimental Aircraft Programme (EAP), which made its first flight in 1986 and was retired in 1991. The EAP fed directly into the development of the multinational Eurofighter Typhoon multirole fighter. The Tempest demonstrator will be supersonic and integrate “stealth compatible features” (in the words of the MOD). The development of the aircraft, which is already under way, involves the use of digital engineering technologies that BAE describes as being both “new and novel”, such as model-based systems engineering and synthetic modelling. The development and construction of the demonstrator aircraft will trial processes of designing, testing, evaluating and building a sixth-generation fast combat jet aircraft. The aim is to significantly reduce the time (and so cost) to design, deliver and subsequently upgrade future complex combat aeroplanes. Although the FCAS/Tempest is currently a sovereign British programme, the UK is currently developing opportunities for collaboration on the project with Italian companies. (It should be noted that Leonardo UK is the British subsidiary of the Italian Leonardo group.) And Britain is also now conducting joint future air combat concept analysis with Italy and Japan, to understand where they have shared interests and partnership opportunities. Further decisions in this regard are expected from the three countries before the end of this year. (Sweden’s Saab is already involved with Tempest.) “I am delighted that the UK, alongside Italy and Japan, are working on similar combat air journeys together,” affirmed Wallace. “Our work with Japan and Italy on cutting-edge technology like this shows the benefit of our alliances across the world. The design and development of the demonstrator aircraft represents an important milestone, showcasing the success and talent of our engineers, programmers and software developers. This programme will go on to attract opportunities for many more great minds and talent from across the UK.”