Brazil-based major aerospace group Embraer has entered an agreement with Toyota do Brasil to implement the principles and concepts of the Toyota Production System (TPS) at the former group’s industrial operations. The aerospace group is the world’s leading manufacturer of airliners with up to 150 seats, but also produces military aircraft and other defence systems and additionally is active in the space sector. Embraer adopted the ‘Lean production’ philosophy in 2007, which allowed the company to undertake an integrated transformation of its processes, focused on ‘safety first, quality always, deliveries on time, all at best cost’. Now, with the adoption of the TPS, the aerospace group seeks to further increase efficiency, eliminate waste and increase stakeholder value generation. “Bringing Toyota to execute this work reinforces Embraer’s commitment to focus on business excellence and sustainable growth,” affirmed Embraer CEO Francisco Gomes Neto. “It will be an excellent opportunity to exchange knowledge and accelerate the usage of the Lean philosophy in the production systems, while strengthening practices already conducted by the Embraer Enterprise Excellence Programme, the P3E.” “TPS is a methodology that can contribute to different scenarios and occasions,” highlighted Toyota do Brasil president Rafael Chang. “More than efficiency and productivity, the TPS can provide solutions that allow industry and other sectors to continuously improve their processes, which is one of Toyota’s pillars worldwide.” As a result of the agreement, and as Phase 1 of the joint initiative, Toyota do Brasil TPS specialists will be assigned to Embraer’s main production plant, the Ozires Silva facility, located in the city of São José dos Campos, in São Paulo state. There, the specialists will immerse themselves in the daily work of the plant to evaluate manufacturing procedures and then propose improvements. Embraer was founded in 1969. Since then, it has manufactured more than 8 000 aircraft. Aircraft manufactured by the group transport more than 145-million passengers a year.