Internet service provider RocketNet has partnered with fibre optic network provider Zoom Fibre to roll out high-speed fibre Internet in Saldanha Bay. The fibre network will serve as the backbone on which the Saldanha Bay municipality will build its smart city infrastructure, says RocketNet CEO Simon Swanepoel. "Smart city infrastructure creates opportunities for citizens within their cities. Cities improve efficiency in managing resources using insightful data captured from Internet of Things devices. “Data is analysed to prioritise a city's repair and maintenance, to manage traffic flow better and create greener living spaces. Fibre Internet is the power that drives this infrastructure, and we are excited to be part of this journey,” he avers. RocketNet is working closely with Zoom Fibre to add value by building sustainable solutions for the fibre Internet system. These solutions include free 1 Gb/s fibre Internet for qualifying schools sponsored by Zoom Fibre and Internet service provider partners like RocketNet. Further, every home in the Saldanha Bay municipality will receive an optical network terminal linked to their utility meters, enabling residents to monitor their use via a Digital Citizens application. These value-added services allow any resident in the municipality to order fibre services regardless of location or income and at a time that suits them, Swanepoel says. “Zoom Fibre is striving to make a meaningful difference in society by driving affordable and agile digital inclusion across all sectors of society. “Alongside our partners, we are committed to the Baobab project, which exists to ensure that every citizen has access to high-speed connectivity which will support improved access to services and new technologies, creating a smart city for the benefit of all residents within the municipality,” says Zoom Fibre CEO Mo Manjra. "We are passionate about getting people connected to the Internet. It opens a world of possibilities, as citizens can engage with their cities from handheld devices. It bridges the digital divide by creating accessibility to sectors such as financial services, empowering people to dream bigger," comments RocketNet chief marketing officer Warren Thomas.