City of Johanneburg (CoJ) and Metrobus executives on July 13 unveiled some of the 105 buses it recently refurbished to the value of R50-million. The entity started a 36-month refurbishment programme in 2019 to help address the challenge of an aging bus fleet. Some of Metrobus’ buses have been operating in excess of 12 years – the general lifetime of a public transport bus. Metrobus initially targeted refurbishing 100 buses, but managed to exceed this goal. The entity also got six buses working again which were not operational before the programme. While some buses underwent the standard mid-life maintenance, others needed an entire engine and/or gearbox overhaul and had new floors and lighting installed. A small contractor appointed to assist with the refurbishing, Bus Build Africa, commended the CoJ and Metrobus for completing the programme on time and within budget, despite the restrictions to travel and business activity imposed at the height of Covid-19. Bus Build Africa MD Dr Julian Naidoo says the refurbishment programme has extended the useful lifetime of the 105 buses and resulted in the creation of more jobs at Bus Build Africa. He adds that the exercise did not come without challenges, as the variations in work needing to be done on each bus varied greatly. Metrobus MD Xoliswa Mhlongo says the entity’s service offering to its eight-million passengers a year can only be as good as the quality of its fleet. She highlights how the fleet renewal strategy revolved around repair, refurbishing and replacement to ensure a safe and positive experience for commuters. Metrobus also took the opportunity to optimise its 226 routes in the city and increase frequencies of trips, now that more buses are available for service, and more will be acquired in the next financial year. Metrobus chairperson Pamla Yongama adds that the programme occurred against the backdrop of growing demand for public transport services and a pressurised government budget. She says Metrobus does not just drive buses, but drives the economy. Transport MMC Funzela Ngobeni confirms that Metrobus will embark on another refurbishment programme to refurbish and replace more of its fleet, to the value of R90-million. He also affirms that an automated fare collection service will be rolled out in Johannesburg for Metrobus buses soon, to improve revenue collection and eliminate revenue losses within the entity. CoJ executive Mayor Mpho Phalatse explains that Metrobus successfully completing an extensive refurbishment programme aligns with the multi-party government in Johannesburg’s “Golden Start” priorities. These include getting efficient and affordable public transport in place, delivering a safe city, being a caring city, being a business friendly city and being an inclusive city. Phalatse encourages Metrobus to continue piloting solutions for making its fleet “greener”, including buses that run on liquefied natural gas, which the entity has been experimenting with. She thanked Metrobus for contributing to an efficient and well-run economy in the city, and helping Johannesburg to remain the economic hub of South Africa.