The Media, Information and Communication Technologies Sector Education and Training Authority (MICT Seta) and digital and Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) skills development company Forge Academy and Labs have signed a memorandum of understanding to introduce an array of information and communication technology (ICT) interventions to bridge the digital skills gap and prepare students for 4IR opportunities. Digital skills are critical to ensure the youth of South Africa are able to compete in the marketplace on a global scale. The partnership is expected to continue for a period of two years and will include accredited skills training, ecosystem building, workforce development programmes and public policy, Forge says. The partnership aims to address the skills shortage and combat high unemployment among the youth. The collaboration comes when more than half of youth worldwide will not have the necessary skills to excel in Industry 4.0. Creating an environment where they can thrive, contribute and leave their mark on the global digital economy is a top priority, Forge adds. The partnership will achieve the goal by identifying and nurturing tech talent among youth, supporting tech entrepreneurs and their businesses and providing industry-leading education. This drive will spur change and improve the lives of South African citizens. “More collaboration between like-minded institutions with a passion for seeing our youth excel in building a future for themselves is better for all. This partnership, and others like it, are critical to securing the future of our nation for generations to come. “The 4IR industry is evolving, and being equipped for changes happens when the right education gets delivered,” comments Forge COO Craig Clutty. “The MICT Seta is intent on establishing partnerships that move the sector into key future skills domains. This partnership brings us a step closer to realising our vision as an organisation, and further accelerates our efforts of scaling up digital skills to South African youth. “The 4IR requires us to produce skills that are aligned with the demands of this revolution. Through this collaboration we are certain we are on the right path of building a pool of talent with relevant skill sets for employment and entrepreneurship prospects,” adds MICT Seta CEO Matome Madibana.