UK advanced aerospace propulsion systems company Reaction Engines Limited (REL) and UK-based global major propulsion and power systems group Rolls-Royce jointly revealed, on Monday, at the Farnborough International Air Show, new details of the UK’s Hypersonic Air Vehicle Experimental (HVX) programme. (Hypersonic aircraft or missiles can travel at and above five times the speed of sound, or Mach 5 in aerospace terminology.) The announcement included the fact that a full-scale experimental engine testing programme had started. In addition to Rolls-Royce and REL (who formed a strategic partnership in 2020), the HVX programme includes the Rapid Capabilities Office (RCO) of the UK Royal Air Force and the UK’s Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, while the UK National Security Strategic Investment Fund provides financial support. The HVX programme was launched in June last year and is intended to make the UK a leader in reusable hypersonic air vehicles. “Reaction Engines is excited to be leading this ambitious, future-focused, programme with the [RCO] and strategic partners, bringing together the best of the best in technology, talent and innovation, to provide the UK with a unique capability in reusable hypersonic systems,” highlighted REL CE Mark Thomas. “This collaboration will enable Rolls-Royce to work effectively alongside [REL] and our strategic partners to develop innovative and cutting-edge technologies that will provide our customers with the equipment needed to meet their military requirements,” affirmed Rolls-Royce Future Programmes director John Wardell. “The HVX programme will bring together a unique opportunity to raise the UK’s profile in our ability to develop both the skills and technology in the fast-evolving area.” The aim of the programme is to rapidly develop essential technologies for high-Mach number and hypersonic speed flight. These include novel architectures for air-breathing propulsion systems, innovative systems for thermal management (hypersonic flight generates a lot of heat) and advanced concepts for the actual air vehicle. The core element of HVX are the innovative pre-cooler technology and Synergistic Air Breathing Rocket Engine technologies developed by REL. Rolls-Royce provides world-leading and complimentary gas turbine technologies. It is expected that the HVX programme will be enlarged to include other aerospace companies. The programme will also seek to achieve synergies with space access very fast air transport applications. The programme has also been working on a number of HVX air vehicle concept designs. One of these design concepts, for a single-engine hypersonic air vehicle, was unveiled on the first day of the Farnborough show. This design is designated ‘Concept V’.