From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Rail transport consortium Gibela has unveiled the one-hundredth X’trapolis Mega commuter train it is building for the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa. In 2013 Gibela signed a R53-billion contract to supply PRASA with 600 six-car trains for its Metrorail service. The trains are manufactured at Gibela’s Dunnotar facility, in Nigel, in Ekurhuleni. Creamer Media’s Sabrina Jardim tells us more. Sabrina Jardim: Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula commented that, while the local rail industry was hampered by the Covid-19 pandemic and supply chain issues, the industry is now able to move forward. Mbalula also noted that the 600 trains to be produced by Gibela is relevant for South Africa, and for Africa as a whole. He explained that the African Union General Assembly mandated South Africa to build trains for the continent, primarily for the North-South Corridor. Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula: Sabrina Jardim: PRASA CEO David Mphelo said that the trains being produced by Gibela will provide economic benefits by creating jobs and enabling commuters to save money. However, he cautioned that rail infrastructure needs to be revitalised to be able to accommodate the trains. PRASA CEO David Mphelo: Sabrina Jardim: He added that there are security measures in place to ensure that both the infrastructure and commuters are protected. The trains have in-built technology to ensure the safety of passengers whereby it can brake itself if needed, and the doors do not open while the train is moving. PRASA CEO David Mphelo: Sabrina Jardim: Gibela CEO Hector Danisa said Gibela’s contract with PRASA includes achieving 65% localisation with the production of the trains, with Gibela already having achieved 53%. He noted that should Gibela fail to achieve 65% localisation, the company’s contract with PRASA could be cancelled. Gibela CEO Hector Danisa: Sabrina Jardim: In addition to producing the trains, Gibela is also supporting PRASA technically by training PRASA’s train operators and maintenance team. Gibela CEO Hector Danisa: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.