The International Air Transport Association (Iata) and the Airline Catering Association (ACA) have jointly released an updated version of the Standard Inflight Catering Agreement (SICA). This followed the two bodies entering an agreement to strengthen their bilateral collaboration. Use of the SICA increases inflight catering procurement efficiency, worldwide. Based on industry best practices, the updated SICA template will be incorporated into the Iata Aircraft Handling Manual (use of which ensures the safe handling of aircraft while they are on the ground). It will also be included in ACA’s expanding onboard catering library. The new template is designed to be flexible. This means that it can be adapted to comply with local laws, regulations, contexts, customs and practices, all around the world. It also meets the specific needs identified when the two bodies were negotiating their agreement. “The updated SICA is a significant achievement,” affirmed Iata SVP: operations, safety, and security Nick Careen. “Catering requirements are complex and a unique part of an airline’s service standard. SICA helps both airlines and caterers manage that complexity efficiently to achieve the results that travellers expect. And the collaboration between Iata and ACA has improved SICA by bringing together the expertise of both ACA and Iata. This was a successful first-time collaboration that we intend to continue and expand.” “The updated SICA is a significant step that will benefit our respective members,” highlighted ACA director-general Fabio Gamba. “The clarity that it brings to the intricate work needed to produce millions of inflight meals a day will help both airlines and caterers work more efficiently together. And we look forward to creating even more value for both our memberships in future collaborations.” The two associations will, together, formally present the new SICA template at the thirty-fourth Iata Ground Handling Conference. This will take place from May 31 to June 2 this year, in the French capital of Paris.