The US Trade and Development Agency (USTDA) is providing grant funding for California-based certified women-owned small business Global Resources to undertake a feasibility study to expand broadband infrastructure for 500 000 people in South Africa’s Western Cape. The study will assess the economic and technical viability of deploying new broadband infrastructure across the province, as well as potential ownership and operations models for future broadband deployments. This is in line with the Western Cape government’s ambitions of connecting each town and village in the province to affordable high-speed broadband networks. “USTDA is proud to expand its portfolio of activities that advance South Africa’s digital transformation goals. Under our Access Africa initiative, USTDA is working with partners such as the Western Cape government to support planning for the deployment of critical broadband infrastructure,” said USTDA director Enoh Ebong. Improving broadband access, particularly in the most disconnected communities, is the real enabler of growth, and the feasibility study will guide government on how best to achieve this, said Western Cape Premier Alan Winde. “It marks yet another leap forward to freedom of connection to the world and its economy for our citizens. It is my hope that this investment will one day soon deliver greater ease for entrepreneurs to create and build their businesses, for job-seekers to pursue opportunities and work, and for learners to be able to study and thrive at school.” Winde further added that the signing of the agreement is testament to the strong bilateral relationship between the Western Cape government and its US counterparts. “The US government’s support to expand broadband infrastructure in the Western Cape aims to create economic opportunities and promote mutual prosperity. These goals are the foundation of our trade and investment promotion partnership with the provincial government,” added Consul General Todd Haskell, noting that the commitment ensures that the US is the top foreign direct investor in the province and the province’s top export market with over $1.5-billion in bilateral trade a year. This project supports Access Africa, USTDA’s initiative to advance the development of inclusive, secure, and sustainable information and communications technology infrastructure across Africa, and the US government’s Prosper Africa initiative to substantially increase two-way trade and investment between the US and Africa.