European regional turboprop airliner manufacturer ATR announced, on Wednesday, its plans to develop a new, ‘greener’, generation of aircraft, to be called the ATR EVO. The company was planning for these next-generation airliners to become available by 2030. ATR currently manufactured and marketed two twin turboprop airliners, the 30-seat to 50-seat ATR 42, and the 44-seat to 78-seat ATR 72. It also produced a dedicated freighter version of the latter type, the ATR 72-600F. These two types dominated the global turboprop regional airliner market, with a reported share of about 75%. “Our next generation of aircraft will be a step forward in responsible flying through further incremental innovation,” affirmed ATR CEO Stefano Bortoli. “When it enters the market, the new ATR EVO will pave the way towards a decarbonised future for aviation. Key benefits [will] include a 20% overall fuel improvement and 100% SAF [Sustainable Aviation Fuel] compatibility. This means that the aircraft will emit 50% less [carbon dioxide] than a regional jet when powered by kerosene. When using 100% SAF, its emissions will be close to zero.” The company has issued a Request for Information to the leading aeroengine manufacturers, regarding the development of new powerplants that would incorporate both existing and future engine technologies, including hybrid power capabilities. The ATR EVO would also use ‘bio-sourced’ materials that were lighter, new propellors, and have an improved cabin and systems. The aircraft would also be designed to be recyclable. To achieve these objectives, ATR would work with power plant manufacturers, systems producers and airlines. “The ATR EVO will be even more economical, with double-digit operating cost savings achieved in particular through 20% lower fuel burn and 20% overall maintenance cost reduction,” highlighted ATR SVP: commercial Fabrice Vautier. “This means airlines can serve thin routes more profitably, and communities can benefit from more connectivity, more essential services, and more economic development. Our aim is to continue to offer customers and society ever more inclusive and responsible air transportation.” ATR is a 50:50 joint venture between Airbus and Leonardo. The company sought to launch the programme next year.