South African telecommunications giant MTN Business and UK-based fixed and mobile telecommunications firm BT have partnered to form a strategic alliance to enhance security and communications services to business customers across Africa. The operators will collaborate closely to enhance each other’s strengths, with customers benefiting from BT’s technology combined with MTN’s strong presence on the ground and proximity to customers. New and existing MTN Business customers will gain access to solutions such as cloud-based security and consultancy, managed connectivity and voice services, delivered seamlessly – meeting local regulatory and compliance requirements – as part of MTN’s Enterprise portfolio. The first offering will be a security operations centre service, based on BT’s cloud-based security incident and event management service, which will enable customers to consistently monitor and improve their cybersecurity while preventing, detecting, analysing and responding to cybersecurity incidents. With a subscription-based model that requires no capital investment, and BT’s accredited security team providing 24/7 monitoring and in-life support, the service will be scaled up and available immediately to MTN’s existing and new customers. MTN will also tap into BT’s wide range of unified communications and collaboration solutions, including the provision of wholesale voice, Microsoft Teams voice and global SIP solutions. “The world’s leading banks, healthcare providers, energy companies and governments put their trust in BT to connect and secure their operations. We look forward to working with MTN to bring the same cutting-edge services and solutions to businesses across the African continent,” said BT indirect sales director Alessandro Adriani. “MTN Business continues to deliver innovative solutions to ensure the benefits of the digital economy are expanded to more people and entities across Africa. As this growth happens, however, it is imperative to manage risk,” added MTN chief enterprise business officer Wanda Matandela. “MTN Business is excited about the potential this alliance has to offer and is committed to providing solutions that ensure businesses thrive in the digital economy of the future.”