Business organisation Sakeliga has praised economist Mike Schüssler, who passed away this week, for his forthright analyses, through which he sought to steer policy in better directions and alert business and civil society in general to policy risks. "Schüssler was a guest speaker at Sakeliga events over the years and the organisation benefitted from his ever-readiness to assist with views and advice. Where the need was great, Mike involved himself actively, such as when, in 2020, together with several other people and organisations, including Sakeliga, he helped form 'Business for Ending Lockdown' to counteract the harms of lockdown. "We express our condolences to his loved ones and colleagues," the organisation says. "The burden of a good economist is seeing the otherwise unseen and unforeseen harms of active government and State intervention. Mike bore this burden with distinction and was forthright about the policy-induced problems facing the South African economy and society. “With his public influence he sought to steer government policy in better directions and to alert business and civil society in general to policy risks," Sakeliga says. Meanwhile, trade union Uasa has also paid tribute to Schüssler. “Uasa takes note of Schüssler’s considerable contribution to the South African economy as an economist and shaping Uasa’s economic perspective through researching and presenting the annual Uasa South African Employment Report (SAER) for two decades. “His more recent presentations included the nineteenth Uasa SAER on the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic on the South African economy and jobs in 2020 and the twentieth Uasa SAER, for which he researched and presented his views on South Africa’s unemployment crisis in a post-Covid world. “On behalf of Uasa’s national executive committee, Uasa staff and our members, we express our heartfelt condolences to his family and loved ones. We hope and pray that they will receive all the support they need during this challenging time. Rest in peace, Mike. The Uasa family will miss you," spokesperson Abigail Moyo commented.