Over the past four months, from January to April, the City of Johannesburg’s Department of Development Planning has issued almost 300 compliance notices to property owners who have erected illegal structures without approved building plans, a statement issued by the city’s Development Planning MMC Belinda Echeozonjoku revealed on May 6. The Department of Development Planning has building inspection teams deployed across the city, whose main function is to ensure that all formal construction within the city follows national building regulations and conforms to the conditions of the approved building plans, Echeozonjoku said. “Should a property owner start building without approved plans, they will be issued with a notice informing them of their contravention. The owner must stop building immediately and submit plans to the city for approval within 30 days. “Should the owner fail to comply with the notice, rates penalties may be imposed, and the matter will be referred to the Development Planning Single Law Enforcement unit for legal processes to commence. This may lead to the demolition of the illegal structures that are unoccupied,” she explained. Echeozonjoku added that the same applied to owners who deviated from approved plans during construction, as a notice could be issued by the inspectors informing the property owner of the deviation and steps to be taken to rectify the deviation. She noted with concern that there continued to be ongoing contravention of city bylaws and national legislation. “The department will continue to enforce both national legislation and its bylaws, and it is imperative that residents, property owners and businesses comply so as to avoid penalties and fines, which will ultimately eat at the pockets of property owners and delay work,” she said. Echeozonjoku pointed out that the Department of Development Planning would soon embark on a public awareness campaign, starting with identified hotspot areas to educate residents, property owners and businesses about the relevant legislation and bylaws. “The city does not intend to punish property owners and developers. We are a business-friendly city, but all of that must be done within the limits of the law. We are hoping that these public awareness campaigns will assist to educate property owners and point them in the right direction. “Development planning officials are always available and willing to advise on building and land use matters,” she said.