Brazilian Federal State-owned nuclear energy company Eletronuclear has signed a “Term of Commitment” with another Brazilian company, Nuclebrás Equipamentos Pesados (Nuclep), which is also a Federal State-owned undertaking, to manufacture and deliver new heat exchangers for the country’s third nuclear reactor, Angra 3. The contract is worth more than $84-million. Currently, Brazil has two operating nuclear power reactors, Angra 1 and Angra 2. All three reactor sites are in a single nuclear complex on the coast at Angra dos Reis in Rio de Janeiro state, about 100 km south west of Rio de Janeiro city. “Rio has a clear energy vocation and I believe a lot in the nuclear sector,” highlighted Rio state Governor Cláudio Castro, addressing the signing ceremony. “Nuclep is fundamental for Brazil. It is strategic for the nation and unique in what it produces for the energy, industrial and economic development of the State.” “Rio is the capital of the nuclear sector in Brazil,” pointed out Federal Deputy (equivalent to a US Congressman) Julio Lopes, also speaking at the ceremony. “Nuclep is not the only company in Brazil capable of being part of the national nuclear development [programme] but it is the only one to manufacture what no-one else can. Nuclep is a strategic asset for the country.” Angra 3 was originally launched, as a project, in 1984 but was halted in 1986, before any construction had started. The project was reactivated in 2006, and concrete was first poured in 2010, but it was brought to a halt again in 2015, when it was 65% finished, by a massive corruption investigation by the country’s Federal Police. This resulted in prosecutions, convictions and the cancelling of major Angra 3 contracts. The project was reactivated again last year, when new contracts were awarded to a new consortium (composed entirely of Brazilian companies) to complete the plant. Set up in 1975 to support the Brazilian nuclear energy sector, Nuclep is a specialised heavy industrial company, which diversified into the defence and oil and gas sectors. In fact, it is best known for manufacturing pressure hull sections for submarines constructed in Brazil for the country’s Navy.