Auto and truck parts manufacturer Bridgestone has launched its range of ultrahigh-performance tyres designed for South Africa’s agricultural sector. Bridgestone Southern Africa agriculture manager Willie Stander says the new agriculture range is in line with Bridgestone’s emphasis on providing solutions for targeted industry sectors. “Bridgestone entered the agricultural sector in Europe as far back as 2013. Backed up by Bridgestone’s usual high-quality research and development, the Bridgestone agriculture range has gained a significant share of the market serving the larger, most powerful agricultural vehicles and equipment,” he says. “Bringing this brand into the South African agricultural sector makes great sense given the fact that our farmers are renowned for adopting the latest and best technology to improve their profitability. “South African farmers receive substantially less protection and financial support than many competitor countries, so their success is due in no small part to their ability to use technology to overcome the challenges of farming under challenging conditions,” he adds. Bridgestone’s Firestone brand has been active in the agricultural sector for a number of years. The introduction of the Bridgestone brand widens the company’s solutions offering to take in the top end of the market, the company indicates. Bridgestone’s agriculture tyres will be supported locally by the established support team, with a full range of training, product clinics and on-site product analysis as needed by customers. Bridgestone’s launch offering in South Africa comprises the VT-combine, VT-Tractor and VX-Tractor. The flagship of Bridgestone’s agriculture range, the VT-Tractor radial tyre, is designed for the most advanced, heavy and sophisticated machines. It is said to contribute to lower fuel consumption owing to its ability to work at lower pressures, even when operating under higher loads. The VF technology (very high flexion) in this product also supports lower pressures, which leads to improved traction and an increased footprint, reducing soil compaction, the company highlights. Its sister product, the VT-Combine radial tyre, is designed to offer greater productivity during the busy harvest period. It is highly durable and can carry heavier loads and has a larger footprint for lower soil compaction and outstanding traction, the company acclaims. The VX-Tractor tyre offers increased longevity owing to its robust casing, greater lug volume, and higher wear resistant compound. This product is designed to deliver longer wear life on road and field, Bridgestone outlines. Over time, the company will expand the range on offer in line with market demand.