Pan-African digital services provider and Convergence Partner company inq. is acquiring hyperconverged cloud technology solutions provider Syrex for an undisclosed amount. The deal, which remains subject to Competition Commission and Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) approval, will enable inq. to expand its coverage to the South African market to ultimately facilitate and operate its African divisions and integrate edge computing solutions across the continent. “The combination of Syrex and inq. is geared towards deepening our footprint in South Africa to drive hyperconverged and edge services and solutions within one of the most developed information and communications technology (ICT) markets on the continent both in the public and the private sectors. Syrex brings to the fold the right qualities that our clients require,” said inq. executive chairperson Andile Ngcaba. Edge services are increasingly critical to digital transformation and fundamental to enterprises across the public and private sectors, including banking, financial services and insurance, oil and gas, mining and fast-moving consumer goods, besides others. The strategic acquisition bolsters an already robust business offering from Syrex to provide innovative and reliable solutions to the South African market. Syrex, a hyperconverged solutions provider that delivers the full ICT services offering, from connectivity to security and tailored information technology managed services, holds an ECS/ECNS licence from Icasa and is a well-established solutions provider with partnerships such as Microsoft (Gold), Mimecast (MSP) and Checkpoint (4 star). “The acquisition will bring two strategically aligned businesses together to deliver their technology and services across the African continent. This will bring a combined offering into the African market to deliver the best technologies available. We are very excited that our cross-border clients will benefit from Syrex’s strong hyperconverged solutions and inq.’s edge solutions and services,” added Syrex MD David Herselman. In 2020, inq. also acquired Vodacom Business Africa’s operations in Nigeria, Cote d’Ivoire and Zambia.