A new children’s book, funded and distributed by global water technology company Xylem and its corporate social responsibility programme Xylem Watermark, aims to show young children how to help protect water, using storytelling to increase awareness and drive water conservation. Splash, recently launched at schools in South Africa, Kenya and Egypt, is a creative and engaging way to show children that water is important, said Xylem Africa strategy and marketing manager Chetan Mistry. "Water is one of our most important resources and water's future depends on how much ownership we take over it. “When people are water stewards, they help maintain water for their communities and countries. It is a mindset that works best when you learn it early, which is why Xylem and Xylem Watermark developed Splash,” he explained. The book, the first in a series that will cover different topics, introduces a magical water droplet called Splash, who journeys with Thami the tortoise across Africa and shows him why water is so vital and clever ways to conserve it. During their travels across the continent, they encounter colourful characters such as Vuyo the catfish and Liya the elephant and discover how water brings life. “We wanted to create an epic water-saving adventure for children that would leave them feeling inspired. Our story was inspired by plants and animals across Africa – as well as its incredible landscapes – with a magical twist. Splash brings wonder and joy wherever it goes and makes being a Water Wiz something fun and attainable. We at Super 3 Books are proud to be involved with a local project of this magnitude and hope that it brings joy – and water consciousness – to many young readers,” a Super 3 Books spokesperson said. The book looks at water stewardship, and subsequent releases will cover concepts such as sanitation and the water cycle, with each book engaging children with vibrant characters and fun situations and providing them with skills to take their water knowledge into their communities. They are also encouraged to sign a call to action in the book to become water stewards. “Children are very eager to help and they can have an incredible impact on those around them,” added GrowZA Social Investment Agency’s Craig Kensley. “This is also their future we are talking about - they have a right to know what role they can play to keep water clean and available. With Splash, they discover that they can make a difference. Every drop counts, just as every child counts.” Splash will be launched in several African countries and translated into local languages. The book, which is designed to align with the United Nations’ (UN’s) Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) six of ensuring access to water and sanitation for all, aims to be included in the UN SDG book club and an African export product.