Industry body the South African Photovoltaic Industry Association (SAPVIA) has appointed Dr Rethabile Melamu as its new CEO, effective from the beginning of May. Melamu is a chemical and environmental engineer by training and has international expertise in the green economy and energy sectors. She has a dedicated focus on African sustainable development. She also has experience developing subnational energy, green economy and public sector strategies and policies from inception to implementation. SAPVIA noted in a May 6 media release that Melamu’s private and public sector technical and strategic leadership experience would be an asset to the association as it continued growing the solar photovoltaic (PV) sector’s role in South Africa’s energy future, in collaboration with government, the private sector and other stakeholders. “It is fitting that we have, at the helm of the association, a driven, experienced and powerful advocate for renewable energy. [Melamu] will lead the organisation into a new era of growth, focussing our strategic direction and ensuring that our members capitalise on the local and regional solar markets,” said SAPVIA chairperson Wido Schabel, adding that Melamu’s leadership would ensure SAPVIA developed a culture of thought leadership, leveraging credible market intelligence and curating a best practice solar PV value chain. Melamu most recently served as government agency Innovation Hub green economy GM, where she managed a portfolio of 40 green economy startups that developed and commercialised clean technology solutions and technologies that contributed to climate change mitigation and adaptation, as well as the creation of employment opportunities. She also served as Gauteng Department of Economic Development (GDED) sector and industry development acting chief director, where she led the development of 11 economic sector strategies to ensure that the province was transformed, modernised and reindustrialised. During her time at the GDED, Melamu also spearheaded engagement with private and public sectors, locally and internationally, to stimulate the growth of the green economy in the Gauteng province. “I have no doubt that unlocking largely untapped renewable energy capacity can catalyse the implementation of the country’s sustainable development imperatives, invigorate industrial activity, and deliver meaningful socioeconomic value to its citizens,” Melamu commented. She said she envisioned that SAPVIA and key stakeholders would increasingly contribute towards the creation of conducive business and regulatory environments that would unlock market opportunities along the solar PV value chain for the benefit of not only SAPVIA’s members but the broader sector as well. SAPVIA is a member-led organisation formed with the express purpose of growing the solar PV sector’s role in powering South Africa’s future. The association advocates, engages and influences on behalf of members to harness the power of solar PV and capitalise on the opportunities it offers companies, individuals and the broader South African economy. “Solar PV should play a leading role in the just transition, not least because it can be adapted and harnessed for individual households across South Africa, for large commercial and industrial usage and everything in between. “It is vital that we highlight the potential of solar PV to deliver sustainable and secure electricity for all and I have no doubt Melamu’s experience and energy will ensure we do so in the years ahead,” added SAPVIA spokesperson Maloba Tshehla. Melamu will be supported in her role by the SAPVIA management company and secretariat, as well as the wider membership base. “I strongly value collaborative partnerships. I plan to nurture existing partnerships and foster new ones that will deliver value to our members, the public sector and the country’s citizens. “I would like to bolster SAPVIA’s position as the go-to organisation for all matters relating to the development, regulation and promotion of solar PV in South Africa and sub-Saharan Africa,” Melamu concluded.