JSE-listed real estate investment trust Attacq has appointed David Oosthuizen development executive and Lourens Du Toit sustainability, infrastructure and land head – both as a result of internal promotions, which the company says is an indication of the strength of the talent pipeline it has built. Attacq CEO Jackie van Niekerk says the company has promoted two individuals who embody the characteristics, qualifications and skills needed to carry out Attacq’s broader corporate strategy. “Promoting from within has allowed us to develop and retain core competencies. David and Lourens have an excellent understanding of the organisation, its history and core values and we are excited to see both thrive in their new positions,” she says. Oosthuizen will oversee all of Attacq’s developments within its portfolio, from inception to the delivery of a completed asset. He will also lead an internal development team and manage relationships with key stakeholders to achieve Attacq’s strategic objective in terms of new developments. Oosthuizen has over 15 years of experience, the last five of which have been with Attacq. Formerly the senior property manager in the development division of Attacq, Oosthuizen was responsible for the sourcing, deal structuring and overseeing the delivery of new logistics and warehousing developments at Waterfall City, and was instrumental in delivering the Vantage Data Centre deal to the logistics portfolio. Du Toit, in his new position, will assume responsibility for Attacq's land portfolio enhancements, formulating bulk infrastructure projects, while concentrating on the impact to the environment. One of the key focus areas of the role is driving innovations in resource efficiencies, sustainability and green development to create smart and innovative cities through urban design strategies. He holds over ten years of industry experience, the last four of which have been with Attacq. Du Toit formerly led all activities from master planning to roll out and delivery of sustainable, modern and smart bulk infrastructure and associated services to Waterfall City. In addition, he delivered strategic projects and initiatives that focus on securing sustainable, renewable and resilient energy and continuous water supply to the development. Du Toit says his new role and being able to lead the internal sustainability and urban design teams, will enable further support in aligning Attacq’s strategic objectives within the portfolio. Succession planning is crucial and promoting from within has enabled Attacq to reward top talent and retain the skills needed for their leadership teams. In addition, these new senior appointments will assist Attacq in moving the organisation's mission forward. “. . . David and Lourens are well-positioned to address Attacq’s key priorities, including a precinct-focused South African portfolio that offers sustainable community spaces in established nodes; and drive business diversification through integrating environment, social and governance; business innovation and technology,” concludes Van Niekerk.