The International Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering (IABSE) has appointed engineering consultant company Zutari associate Professor Pierre van der Spuy as its new national group chairperson for South Africa. “Having South African representation on a global technical committee is not only a singular achievement nationally, but testament to the depth of our expertise and experience,” says Zutari CEO Teddy Daka. “I see my role as national group chair to facilitate network building between local and global IABSE members by organising events to showcase South African projects to members globally, to promote structural engineering among our students to increase the supply of professionals to industry, and to work together with other local voluntary associations to add value to members,” comments Van der Spuy. He is currently planning monthly webinars to start discussing various topics and increase engagement within the national group. IABSE is a global voluntary organisation based in Zurich, Switzerland, with members from 90 countries. It promotes the exchange of knowledge and advances the practice of structural engineering worldwide by servicing the profession and society. Van der Spuy is a structural engineer specialising in bridges, for which he holds a PhD, as well as in wind turbine foundations and marine structures. He has received numerous industry awards for incrementally launched bridges and long span arch bridges. He is also an accomplished academic. Work from his PhD and subsequent research have been published in leading international journals and he has presented and published widely at international conferences. Van der Spuy holds a position as adjunct associate professor at Stellenbosch University, where he lectures undergraduate and postgraduate modules in advanced design of concrete structures. He has presented Continuing Professional Development courses on wind turbine foundations and bridge design. He currently works as an Associate Bridge Engineer at Zutari in Cape Town. Zutari’s recent bridge work includes a contract awarded by the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority for design and site supervision services for the Senqu bridge, the Mabunyaneng bridge and the Khubelu bridge, all part of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project Phase II. As part of a joint venture, Zutari is also involved with the Polihali Diversion Tunnels project and the Polihali Transfer Tunnel project.