Agricultural science and technology developer Corteva Agriscience officially opened its Centre for Seed Applied Technologies (CSAT) facility in Rosslyn, Pretoria, on May 5. The CSAT is one of only three such centres, comprising six laboratories, worldwide. This modern facility will use advanced equipment and will focus specifically on recipe development and safety testing of seed applied solutions. The site will also be integrated into Corteva’s global CSAT network and is strategically positioned to meet the ongoing demands of grain producers across Africa and the Middle East, ensuring farmers have access to high-quality seed and better field performance. Speaking at the CSAT launch event, Corteva Africa Middle East seed applied technology manager Johann Janse Van Rensburg explained that the new facility will help local farmers protect their most substantial seasonal investment – their seeds. “Not only does this investment showcase our commitment to regional agriculture and ongoing research and development, but it also demonstrates our ambition to effectively utilise cutting-edge technology to help increase yields, improve livelihoods and ensure sustained food security,” added Corteva Agriscience Africa and Middle East president Venkata Subbarao Kolli. Seed treatments involve the application of chemical or biological substances, such as fungicides or insecticides, directly to the surface of a seed, safeguarding the seeds and seedlings against insects, fungal diseases and soil-borne pathogens. Seed treatments help improve seed and plant health, as well as germination rates; protect plants from the start when they are most vulnerable to insects and disease; and increase the likelihood of a quality and improved harvest. Seed applied technology solutions also allow for an efficient and targeted use of active ingredients, reducing the total amount of pesticides required, helping to preserve biodiversity and pollinators, and promote sustainable agriculture. “We are offering the most complete package of solutions, including the development of the best hybrids, crop protection innovations and now, one of the most sophisticated seed treatment processes farmers can have at their disposal,” said Corteva Agriscience South Africa business director Tony Esmeraldo. Corteva’s evidence-based methodology combines science and ingenuity to develop and deliver advanced seed treatments that enhance grower productivity and contribute to more efficient and resilient food systems. The company’s technical teams evaluate hundreds of products yearly, seeking out the right components and formulations to meet every farmer’s needs. Once products are developed, a rigorous research process is applied focusing on specific aspects such as agronomy, safety and stewardship before solutions reach customers. The new CSAT in Rosslyn was designed with advanced equipment to perform various tests that will ensure the quality of the treatment applied to the seed, offering a greater guarantee to producers in Africa and the Middle East. The facility will also serve Corteva’s respective seed brands – Pannar and Pioneer – as well as other industry collaborators, with a view to create new seed treatment solutions to help farmers overcome the challenges of an ever-changing agricultural industry. The LumiGEN seed treatments for the Pioneer brand are designed, verified and proven to work with the company’s current genetic portfolio, giving farmers a higher level of confidence in their seed treatment options. The Pannar brand’s complete plant health initiative, Panacea, includes a range of dynamic seed treatment products, consisting mainly of fungicides and insecticides or a combination of both, along with unique access to expert agronomic advice. “We strongly believe there is significant opportunity to expand biotechnology solutions in the region. While we already have a number of products that are favourable to the soil and climatic characteristics of Africa and the Middle East, there is room for many more market advancements,” Kolli said.