Industrial software provide AVEVA has committed to achieving net-zero Scope 1 and 2 emissions by 2030 and to have net-zero Scope 1,2 and 3 emissions by 2050, AVEVA Europe, Middle East and Africa global head of digital acceleration Michele Cacciari said this week. "A proper sustainability message is a must, and all our customers have been asking for this. We are also continuing our research and development efforts with the aim to develop more applications that can support our customers on their sustainability journeys," he noted during the X-Change User Conference. About 80% of all emissions globally are linked to energy generated and consumed to drive industries, services and the global economy. All organisations can and must reduce their carbon intensity, which can be supported by leveraging digital technologies and information, he said. "All our simulation products contain a sustainability component that enable users to simulate the different gas emissions and to model new uses, such as carbon capture and use. "Further, we are integrating a new component into the engineering information management tool to improve artificial intelligence capabilities and enable value chain optimisation. We will add this sustainability function to the tool between the middle to the end of the calendar year," Cacciari pointed out. With visibility of emissions and carbon intensity, companies can optimise their operations according to profitability and sustainability. They can then start to do long-term strategic planning, even down to daily scheduling, and identify what energy their products use and what sources they can use, and then optimise their processes and value chains based on these requirements, he explained. "Customers can use [AVEVA's] process simulation capabilities to calculate the impact of making a change in a process in terms of greenhouse-gas emissions, and can use process simulation to model how they can include hydrogen or renewables in their environment and the impact this will have on their overall sustainability and carbon footprint," Cacciari said. Any sustainability initiative requires a strategy, similar to strategies for procurement, but from a carbon and sustainability perspective. Digital technology helps companies to understand where they are in their journeys and where they eventually want to be. "Organisations need a clear understanding of their baseline operations and how they aim to align to prevailing market pressures. The next step on this journey is to gain full visibility of their energy consumption and measures their carbon footprint to optimise their operational efforts to reduce carbon intensity," he said. Further, digital twins help companies modify their operations to improve sustainability as the end result, he added. All companies, and industrial companies, have a responsibility to create a sustainable future. Industrial companies and their service providers have the agency to contribute to this sustainable future, said industrial software company Industry Software Solutions and Support international head of sales Deryn Browning.