Power solutions multinational Eaton Electric has installed a 10 MW modular power system facility, which is its largest installation on the continent to date, at data centre facilities company Africa Data Centres' (ADC's) Midrand premises. Despite time and space constraints and difficult operating conditions, Eaton delivered a bespoke configurable modular power system that extended the electrical infrastructure of the facility without interfering with day-to-day operations, providing an innovative ‘plug and play’ solution that can easily be upgraded in the future. “Eaton’s modular uninterruptible power supply (UPS) is a self-contained system with a patented design, which allows for different types of scalability and better redundancy that may not be provided by a more conventional UPS. “It is easy to install, upgrade and reconfigure, saving considerable time and costs for businesses,” says Eaton data centres segment lead for Africa Armand van Niekerk. After ADC's parent company digital infrastructure provider Liquid Intelligent Technologies Group grew its business to include data storage solutions, it required significant upgrades and improvements to expand the capacity of its legacy building in Johannesburg. The enhanced facilities had to meet data centre site requirements with supporting power solutions, all of which had to be configured to fit into very limited space, Van Niekerk says. “Owing to the nature of our business, on-site installation time had to be restricted and limited to final assembly and cable connections only. “Apart from physical requirements, we expected the solution to offer stability and reliability under all environmental and power supply conditions, in a robust prefabricated structure. Adequate load handling capabilities were essential, as well as ease of operation and maintenance,” says ADC CEO Tesh Durvasula. To address these prerequisites, Eaton built the modular units off-site at its manufacturing plant in Germiston and planned and managed the process of delivering the weighty units by road, using specialised trucks and air-suspension loading trailers, and then lifting them into place using specially hired 700 t cranes. “The air-insulated withdrawable medium-voltage switchgear is compact and a safe, reliable and efficient choice. “Additionally, the Eaton Power Xpert 9395P UPS offers complete isolation of output power from all input power anomalies to deliver 100% conditioned, perfect sine-wave output, even during severe power disturbances,” says Van Niekerk. Further, the energy saver system built into the installation improves efficiency levels by 99% by placing power modules on standby when double conversion is not required. The system can, however, switch to double conversion mode in a matter of milliseconds, if required, he says. “Other benefits of the tailored modular system include that the Energy Saver System can function continuously at ambient temperatures of up to 40 °C without de-rating. Additionally, the UPS is easily scalable, the number of power modules can be specified, and the layout can be chosen to suit the installation. “More than 90% of materials used in the manufacturing process can be recycled, significantly reducing the end-of-life impact. This is an easily adaptable design that can be duplicated and rolled out as a turnkey solution for other partners in the future,” Van Niekerk says.