Pan-African technology group Liquid Intelligent Technologies has partnered with Peace Cable Company to introduce 800 Gb/s of additional subsea capacity in Mombasa on the global submarine cable, which will be ready in 2022. While acting as a new global Internet route between Asia, Europe and the US, the additional capacity will help increase the proliferation of faster and more affordable Internet, cloud and cybersecurity services to the African people and businesses. Liquid, leveraging its 100 000 km of terrestrial fibre across 12 countries, will extend this new capacity to many destinations, including access to other subsea cable landing stations, such as Luanda in Angola, Muanda in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Pointe Noire in Congo. “We have been working closely with Peace to extend the subsea capacity to more landlocked countries, including Uganda, Rwanda, South Sudan, Ethiopia, Burundi and the north-east of DRC. This is critical for our customers to leverage higher bandwidth, and it is expected to make the Internet faster and more affordable in the region,” said Liquid Intelligent Technologies division Liquid Dataport CEO David Eurin. “We are delighted to provide new subsea capacity between Mombasa, Karachi and Marseille, with extensions planned towards Singapore and Asia,” he said, noting that it creates a cost-effective, low-latency and diverse route that customers can leverage to serve their business-critical connectivity needs. Liquid already has access to many subsea cables around Africa, including Equiano, WACS, SAT3/SAFE, EASSy, Teams, Seacom and 2Africa. With the new Peace cable, the continent will benefit from much-needed additional capacity from the East Coast of Africa to Europe. Additionally, it will add diversity to an important route, allowing for improved redundancy and low latency. “We see around a 40% to 50% growth in Internet traffic every year, so we invest massively in subsea cables to provide the best Internet experience across all countries in Africa,” Eurin concluded.